Abstract
The aim of this study was to gain more in-depth understanding of students’
emotions in an EFL context by applying dynamic assessment (DA) procedures
to the development of learners’ emotional intelligence. The study with 50 intermediate learners aged 12-15 used three modalities: a control group, which
was taught under institute’s normal procedures; a comparison group, which
received DA; and an experimental group, which received emotionalized dynamic assessment (EDA) procedures, in the form of an intervention focusing
on emotional characteristics of Goleman's emotional intelligence framework
with the express purpose of inducing them to work with their emotions. The
study shows the potential of EDA for increasing one’s emotional intelligence
and affords practical guidelines to language teachers as to how to incorporate
behaviors relating to emotional intelligence into assessment procedures.
Keywords: dynamic assessment, emotion, emotional intelligence, language learning, motivation, reading performance
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
214
Previous studies have demonstrated that emotions have a pivotal role in
cognitive processes and more particularly in foreign language learning, which
involves mutual interactions between cognition and emotion (Arnold, 1999;
Dewaele, 2005, 2011; MacIntyre & Gregersen, 2012; Swain, 2013). The roles of
emotional factors in foreign/second language learning contexts have also been
addressed with reference to a number of methodologies such as
suggestopedia and some models such as Krashen’s monitor model. In the input hypothesis, Krashen proposed the existence of an affective filter. “Positive
emotions were related to a low affective filter, thereby letting in more input,
meaning that more learning would occur; negative emotions were related to a
high affective filter, thereby keeping out input, meaning that less learning
would occur” (Swain, 2013, p. 198).
Following Salovey and Mayer's (1990) proposal of emotional intelligence
(EI), who defined it as “the ability to perceive emotions, to access and generate
emotions so as to assist thought, to understand emotions and emotional
knowledge, and to reflectively regulate emotions so as to promote emotional
and intellectual growth” (Mayer, Salovey, & Caruso, 2004, p. 197), a number of
studies made an attempt to find its relationship with academic performance
(Song et al., 2010; Stottlemayer, 2002) but few investigated its concordance
with foreign language learning (Abdolrezapour & Tavakoli, 2012; Dewaele,
Petrides, & Furnham, 2008). Knowing that the emotional state of the learner
would affect his/her performance in an academic setting, it is apposite to devise
intervention programs to improve the learner’s EI so as to set him/her under the
best emotional conditions of learning. In the current EI studies, a variety of theoretical frameworks and assessment tools with only partial overlap among them
exist. Nevertheless, the problem with most is the observed mismatch between
the theory and the applied assessment process in that they have been characterized as static, neglecting the reciprocal functional intertwinedness of the
learner and environment (Dowson & McInerney, 2003; Lewin, 1954).
Vygotsky’s (1987) proposal of the link between cognition and emotion
has been confirmed by neurobiological and brain research (e.g., Damasio,
1999), psycholinguistic research (Rommtveit, 1998) and research on second
language acquisition (Swain, 2013). Moreover, from a Lewinian perspective
(Lewin, 1954), there is a reciprocal functional intertwinedness between an
individual and his/her surrounding environment. Therefore, the ability of a
person cannot be defined without relating to the relevant elements of his or
her immediate environment or psychological situation. In spite of repeated
reference to the effect of emotion in learning and more specifically second
language learning and in one’s zone of proximal development, previous at-
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
215
tempts on using dynamic assessment (DA) paid little attention to the emotional states of learners and the possibility of integrating it with DA procedures.
This study aims to address such problems by introducing an emotionallyloaded DA which intends to capture the dynamic nature of one’s EI and its interaction with the context. Dynamic assessment is an assessment approach which is
basically grounded in socio-cultural theory and specifically in Vygotsky’s notion of
zone of proximal development (ZPD) whereby instruction leads development. The
main reason for using the DA approach in assessing one’s EI is the importance
given by DA proponents to learner-environment interactions and the incorporation of the students’ cognitive, emotional and motivational states into instructional activities in order to keep students engaged, increase their interest, and
presumably maximize their learning (Goldstein, 1999; Holzman, 2009).
Therefore, the major objective of this study is to assess the learner’s EI
in the second language (L2) context applying DA processes and examine the
effects of an emotionally-based DA as compared to pure DA (assessment with
no emphasis on emotions) on boosting the learner’s EI. This article first provides an overview of EI in the L2 classroom. Then, we describe the emotional
mediation program used in this study. Finally, the results of the present study
are reported and discussed.
Review of Literature
Emotional Intelligence
Since the initial introduction of the popular phrase emotional intelligence by Salovey and Mayer (1990), which was firmly rooted in past psychological thinking, research and practice, numerous studies have been conducted to understand how EI is related to valued social outcomes and functions. It
was Daniel Goleman who brought it into the academic performance mainstream with the publication of his 1995 book (Emotional Intelligence: Why It
Can Matter More Than IQ). Following Goleman (1995), a number of studies
showed that social and emotional skills play a central role in one’s academic,
social and personal life above and beyond one’s general intelligence (Downey,
Mountstephen, Lloyd, Hansen, & Stough, 2008; Parker, Summerfeldt, Hogan,
& Majeski, 2004; Song et al., 2010; Stottlemayer, 2002).
Also, in academic domains there has been an increasing movement toward a specific niche in psychology, namely positive psychology, which explores
the sources of happiness, satisfaction, hope, optimism, and well-being which
ultimately allow individuals to flourish (e.g., Fredrickson & Losasda, 2005; Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000). Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi (2000) argued
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
216
that people need positive emotional experiences, autonomy, and self-regulation
in pursing personally important goals and that educational and workplace interventions can help them satisfy their needs. In fact, they are echoing Goleman’s
(1995) view that raising one’s EI will ultimately improve one’s condition. Nevertheless, it should be pointed that devising EI programs needs more than giving
positive feelings; such programs should let learners know how to overcome
negative feelings and barriers in life. In addition, such interventions should be
based on a theoretical and methodological rationale. Currently, a number of
attempts have been designed to improve EI and except for some (e.g., Nelis,
Quoidbach, Mikolajczak, & Hansenne, 2009) which are based on Mayer and
Salovey’s (1997) four branches model, they have either targeted only some dimensions of EI (e.g., Topping, Holmes, & Bremmer, 2000) or lacked a solid theoretical background (e.g., Matthews, Zeidner, & Roberts, 2007).
Mayer and Salovey (1997), who have been trying to find a psychometric
test, enhanced the skill-based model, that is, a theoretical model according to
which EI consists of emotional abilities. The skill model was later contrasted with
trait-based models, suggesting that EI encompasses a variety of emotional skills,
including aspects of personality, which can be measured by self-report inventories (Petrides & Furnham, 2001). The trait model conceives EI as a multifaceted
construct entailing between 13 and 15 (depending on the model) emotionrelated behavioral dispositions which are thought to affect the ways in which an
individual would cope with demands and pressures. The EI programs proposed
in this study are anchored in Goleman's EI framework. It is a distinct model encompassing both traits and characteristics, and it can be subsumed under the
trait EI model. In this framework EI is a combination of five characteristics: (a)
knowing one’s emotion, (b) managing one’s emotion (i.e., handling fear, anxiety,
etc.), (c) motivating oneself (emotional control, the ability to delay gratification),
(d) recognizing emotions in others, and (e) handling relationships.
Applied linguists have recently sought to understand the impact of emotion in learning a second/foreign language (Abdolrezapour & Tavakoli, 2012;
Dewaele, 2005, 2011; Dewaele, Petrides, & Furnham, 2008) and the possibility
of flourishing one’s EI through emotional activities in English as a foreign language (EFL) context has been investigated by Abdolrezapour and Tavakoli
(2012). However, the efficacy of the intervention, in their study, was assessed
through standard statistical procedures and the dynamic nature of emotion
and its interaction with environment was neglected. The present study intends
to fill this gap by using DA procedures which are emotionally loaded in exploring L2 learners’ emotional state.
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
217
Dynamic Assessment in an L2 context
Dynamic assessment is basically grounded in Vygotsky’s innovative insight that in the ZDP instruction leads development (Lantolf & Thorn, 2006).
The critical point which distinguishes DA from other forms of assessment is
firstly that the process of learning is elicited by the specific way of assessment.
Moreover, the outcome of the assessment provides not only an insight of an
individual’s abilities, but also reveals which types of assistance elicit those abilities through mediation (Lantolf & Poehner, 2004). Generally speaking, conventional forms of assessment, when administered in an unassisted manner,
only give an understanding of what the individual has already mastered, while,
as Sternberg and Grigorenko (2002) argued, one's true abilities or potential
level is better captured in assisted, scaffolded assessment.
Three distinct understandings of ZPD feature in the insightful discussion
offered by Holzman (2009). First, it may be viewed as a characteristic or property of an individual learner. Holzman (2009) says that those who have interpreted
ZPD in terms of assessment and try to devise alternative means of evaluation
(Allal & Pelgrims, 2000; Lantolf, 2000) subscribe to this understanding. Second,
ZDP may be an approach to offering social support to learners, usually in dyadic
interactions. In this view, psychologists conceptualize "ZPD as some form of aid"
from "a single, more capable individual, most often an adult" (Holzman, 2009, p.
28). Third, ZDP may be seen as a collective transformative activity of development undertaken with learners. However, as Goldstein (1999) and Holzman
(2009) rightly put forth, the interpretations of Vygotsky just mentioned are limited to strictly cognitive aspects (Berk & Winsler, 1995; Dean, 1994; Stone,
1993). In these collective activities which are mainly based on the interaction
between individuals, emotions cannot be fully ignored. While taking into account that “understanding happens between people; it can’t be attributed to
one individual or the other” (Rogoff, 1990, p. 67), we find that the process of
cognitive growth is deeply relational. Moreover, there is “a high degree of interpersonal connection between the individuals working together in the process”
(Goldstein, 1999, p. 648). The focus on interpersonal interactions brings affective factors to one’s mind. In other words, in the learning-leading-development
groupings, an “emotional zone” is created in which the instructor and each individual member supposedly are encouraged to develop “the group’s level of
emotional development” (Holzman, 2009, p. 35).
Studies on DA in specific academic domains have proliferated since the
late 1980’s pioneering work of Campione and Brown (1987); nevertheless, its
pedagogical applications in applied linguistics have only recently been examined
by a number of researchers (Ableeva, 2010; Antón, 2003, 2009; Kozulin & Garb,
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
218
2002; Lantolf & Poehner, 2004; Poehner, 2005). Previous studies in the realm of
L2s have focused on such skills as listening (Ableeva, 2010), speaking (Hill &
Sabet, 2009) and reading (Cioffi & Carney, 1983; Guterman, 2002). While all
previous studies rely on a pretest-mediation-posttest paradigm, none, to our
knowledge, put explicit emphasis on the learner’s emotional state while learning potential is elicited, which is the focus of the investigation described below.
Given the inextricable link between emotion and cognition, it is reasonable to hypothesize that an emotionally loaded DA procedure that is sensitive
to both cognitive and affective states of L2 learners would positively affect
their learning. The study presented below is a significant departure from previous EI and DA research in that it investigates whether and how emotions
may function as an auxiliary tool in DA procedures.

Research Questions
In order to examine the efficacy of emotionally-loaded DA activities on
L2 learners' EI, the following research question and the corresponding hypothesis are posed: Does exposing learners to emotionalized dynamic assessment
(EDA) procedures have a significant effect on their EI scores? Based on the
theoretical and empirical evidence discussed in the literature that supported
the positive effect of exposing learners to emotional activities on one’s EI
(Abdolrezapour & Tavakoli, 2012; Nelis et al., 2009), it is predicted that EDA
procedures will positively affect learners' emotional state.
Method
As shown in Table 1, the study employed a quasi-experimental pretesttreatment-posttest design involving three intact EFL classes, one serving as the
experimental group which received emotionally-loaded DA (n = 14). The second group was the comparison group which received pure DA (n = 17). The
third group served as control condition (n = 19) and it underwent the normal
procedures. The treatment for experimental and comparison groups involved
an interactionist DA approach.
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
219
Table 1 Design of the study
Pretest Treatment
(8 weeks)
Posttest
Experimental
group (EDA)
(n = 14)
Test of reading comprehension + TEIQue-ASF
Exposing subjects to
emotionally-loaded DA
procedures and inducing
them to talk about their
emotions
TEIQue-ASF
Comparison
group (DA)
(n = 17)
Test of reading comprehension + TEIQue-ASF
Exposing subjects to DA
procedures with no emphasis on emotional
content or words
TEIQue-ASF
Control group
(CG)
(n = 19)
Test of reading comprehension + TEIQue-ASF
Exposing subjects to
reading texts with no
emphasis on emotional
content or words
TEIQue-ASF
Participants
The respondents included EFL learners who enrolled in a language center in Iran. A total of 50 students studying Interchange 2 (Richards, Hull, &
Proctor, 2005) participated in this study. Learners were native speakers of
Farsi and they had taken English courses for 1 to 2 years. Their level of English
proficiency was intermediate; that is, all participants were currently taking the
intermediate EFL course offered by the institution. None of these participants
had additional exposure to the English language, apart from the regular TV
programs and the Internet. Only 6 participants had ever been to a country
where English was spoken as a native language, and they reported a length of
residence ranging from 4 days to 1 month. The participants were in three intact classes taught by the same instructor. One class was taken as the experimental condition with 14 students; the comparison condition involved 17 students; and the control condition had 19 students. All participants were female
and they varied in age from 12 to 15. To make sure of the homogeneity of the
three classes in terms of level of proficiency prior to the experiment, all participants took the grammar part of the Oxford Placement Test 2 (Allan, 1992) and
their responses were scored on a scale of 100 points. Results revealed that
participants in all three groups had a range of scores between 45 and 51.
Participants agreed to be videotaped and audiotaped while studying.
Two camcorders were used to record participants’ activities: one to capture
the individual who was performing the task and the other to capture the larger scene, including the participant and the peers as well as the instructor. An
external microphone connected to the main camcorder was used to capture
low-volume sounds made by participants.
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
220
Instruments
For the purpose of the present study, a number of instruments were
used, which will be described in this section.
Trait Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire-Adolescent Short Form
(TEIQue-ASF). As it was mentioned before, this study focuses on trait EI. Trait EI,
assessed by self-report, is regarded as an emotion-related dispositional trait
which is a lower-level component of personality (Petrides, Pita, & Kokkinaki,
2007). In this study, the short form of the TEIQue (Petrides, Sangareau,
Furnham, & Frederickson, 2006) comprised of 30 items was used to measure
the students’ EI prior to the experiment to ascertain their initial comparability.
TEIQue-ASF is a simplified version, in terms of wording and syntactic complexity,
of the adult short form of the TEIQue developed for use with adolescents aged
12-18 years. All items are sampled from the 15 subscales of the adult trait EI
sampling domain (two items per subscale). The test yields scores on four factors, namely well-being (covering self-esteem, happiness, and optimism), selfcontrol (covering low impulsiveness, stress management, and emotion regulation), emotionality (covering emotion expression, relationships, empathy, and
emotion perception), and sociability (covering assertiveness, emotion management, and social awareness) in addition to global trait EI. Example items include
“I can control my anger when I want to,” “I’m happy with my life,” and “I’m
good at getting along with my classmates.” Higher scores on the TEIQue-ASF
indicate higher levels of trait EI. We opted for the short version with 10-minute
completion time, because we had time limitation and there was a concern that
the participants might not be able to complete the longer version (e.g., due to
reading difficulties). Subjects were offered help whenever they had difficulty
understanding the wording of an item. They responded on a 7-point Likert scale
continuum from completely disagree (number 1) to completely agree (number
7). Cooper and Petrides (2010) provided evidence about the validity of the
TEIQue-ASF through item response theory. In their two studies, the psychometric properties of the TEIQue-ASF were examined and results showed that most
items had good discrimination parameters, indicating that they were effective at
discriminating individuals across the range of the latent trait. In this study the
reliability of the test was found to be relatively high (Cronbach’s ɲ = .89). Factor
analyses also provide support for the construct validity of the questionnaire; in
this sample, confirmatory factor analysis provided evidence for the four factors
underlying TEIQue-ASF, i.e., well-being, self-control, emotionality, and sociability.
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
221
Reading comprehension test. To assess the subjects’ reading comprehension ability prior to the experiment, researchers (one of whom was the instructor of the three classes) built and administered a reading comprehension test
comprised of 30 items. The reading test included several passages each followed by a few questions assessing reading ability in various forms, for example,
multiple choice, short answer, and true/false. The students scored 1 point for
each correct answer. A pilot test on 42 intermediate learners yielded the reliability (Cronbach’s ɲ) of .86 and the criterion-related validity using learners’ reading scores of previous term as the criterion was .82. In addition, the tests gained
professional-judgment-based content validity (from a group of five colleagues).
Design
A test of reading comprehension and the TEIQue-ASF (Petrides et al.,
2006) were administered to check the equality of the three conditions in
terms of trait EI and reading comprehension prior to the experiment. Then
learners went through the 8-week treatment. Participants had about 10 hours
of English per week: 3 hours for reading activities, and 7 hours for speaking,
listening and writing. There were 24 lessons between the pre and posttests.
The subjects of the three conditions were exposed to instructional activities;
those in the experimental group had EDA intervention, the ones in the comparison group received DA, whereas the control group went through the normal institution procedures with texts of the same level as the ones used with
the other groups. However, in selecting the readings for these two groups
every attempt was made to select reading passages that included no emotional words or content. Then, the TEIQue-ASF was administered to the three conditions for posttest measures.
Experimental Conditions
Dynamic assessment intervention. On the whole, we administered the
reading test six times consecutively between the pretest and the posttest. The
first time, there was no intervention after the test, which helped the instructor
to have an understanding of the individual’s baseline performance. The test
was administered five more times, with five different reading passages, and
after each test we had the intervention procedure, which was designed to give
learners elaborated feedback about their performance on the reading test
(e.g., what aspects were correct or not) and aimed at focusing their attention
on the task; in addition, some guiding questions were posed to help learners
find the correct answer. Here, some reading passages were provided for learn-
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
222
ers followed by some items in which they were asked to work collaboratively or
individually to find answers which were mainly without a focus on emotional
aspects (similar to the texts used for the control group). These passages were all
short. A sample reading given is provided in Appendix A.
Emotionalized dynamic assessment intervention. The difference between EDA and DA lies in the type of intervention provided to the learners and
reading passages given. After each test (similarly to the DA group we had six
tests and the first was used to gain some information about learners’ current
level), we had the emotional intervention procedures, which were designed to
give learners elaborated feedback about performance in the preceding section,
pose guiding questions, encourage task involvement, make intrinsic motivation,
regulate examinee’s behavior and was aimed at focusing their attention on the
emotional aspects of the task. Meanwhile, the instructor gave some information
about Goleman's EI framework and tried to focus the questions on characteristics of EI. Here, some reading passages, which mainly had emotional background, were provided to learners followed by some texts in which they were
asked to work collaboratively or individually to find answers. A sample reading
given to the EDA group is provided in Appendix B.
Given that the questions had multiple-choice format, we predicted that
learners would sometimes guess the correct answer or reach it applying testtaking strategies rather than text comprehension. So, occasionally, after
providing the answer (whether the choice was correct or incorrect), they were
asked to give reasons for choosing a given answer. The design of the mediation process is outlined in Table 2; as can be seen, we had six dynamic sessions
shown as DA1, DA2, DA3, DA4, DA5 and DA6.
Table 2 Mediation design
Assessment Task description EDA mediation DA mediation
Test 1: Pretest 1. Reading a text in L2;
2. Independent completion of test items
None None
Test 2: DA1 1. Reading a text in L2;
2. Independent completion of test items;
3. Answering the same
questions after mediation
1. Introduction to
Goleman’s EI
framework;
2. Providing explicit
and implicit feedback, posing guiding questions
Providing explicit
and implicit feedback and posing
guiding questions to
help learners find
the correct answer
Test 3: DA2 1. Reading a text in L2;
2. Independent completion of test items;
3. Revising the same quesProviding explicit and
implicit feedback, posing
guiding questions, encouraging task involveProviding explicit
and implicit feedback and posing
guiding questions to
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
223
tions after mediation ment help learners find
the correct answer
Test 4: DA3 1. Reading a text in L2;
2. Independent completion of test items;
3. Revising the same questions after mediation
Providing explicit and
implicit feedback, posing
guiding questions, encouraging task involvement, making intrinsic
motivation
Providing explicit
and implicit feedback and posing
guiding questions to
help learners find
the correct answer
Test 5: DA4 1. Reading a text in L2;
2. Independent completion of test items;
3. Revising the same questions after mediation
Providing explicit and
implicit feedback, posing
guiding questions, encouraging task involvement, making intrinsic
motivation, regulating
examinee’s behavior
Providing explicit
and implicit feedback and posing
guiding questions to
help learners find
the correct answer
Test 6: DA5 1. Reading a text in L2;
2. Independent completion of test items;
3. Revising the same questions after mediation
Providing explicit and
implicit feedback, posing
guiding questions, encouraging task involvement, making intrinsic
motivation, regulating
examinee’s behavior
Providing explicit
and implicit feedback and posing
guiding questions to
help learners find
the correct answer
Goleman's EI framework was used in the assessment tasks as follows:
1. Knowing one’s emotions: To make learners aware of their emotions,
there were some questions which asked learners to think about the
way the character was feeling and find its cause. Then, the teacher
asked learners to think about similar situations and their feelings. In
this way, they improved their self-understanding. Then, they were
asked to talk about different emotions and their causes.
2. Recognizing emotions in others: To improve learners’ level of empathy, the teacher encouraged them to pay attention to the body language of characters depicted in the text. In the final stage, parts of the
text which could help them gain a better understanding of others'
emotions were read again.
3. Managing one’s emotions: To help learners learn how to manage their
emotions, the teacher read a part of the text where the character felt
an emotion (e.g., sadness or anger) and then asked the students to
find the cause of that emotion (i.e., what triggered it). Then, they were
asked to read the rest of the text and find how that emotion was dealt
with and how that strategy influenced their friends and people around
them. When the text ended, the teacher asked the students to discuss
the possible ways of managing that emotion more effectively.
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
224
4. Handling relationships: To make students aware of the fourth characteristic of Goleman's theory, learners were invited to read the parts of
the text which showed interactions between characters again. Then,
they were asked to think about themselves in characters’ positions and
to say what their friends would have done to make them feel better?
5. Motivating oneself: To raise learners’ level of self-motivation, some
parts of the text in which characters experienced a positive feeling
were read again and learners were asked to talk about the ways characters could change their negative feelings into positive ones. Subsequently, participants were asked to think about their feelings in the
classroom, what they wanted to accomplish and the good reasons they
had for learning the language.
During these communicative activities, there was very little instructional conversation. The teacher tried to step out of her position of authority and act as
a non-knower co-participant in the interactions who is seeking further information from her students. When there were some signs of boredom, she tried
to attract learners' attention by saying "this question might be kind of boring.
Let's get through it together," or "let's keep going, we will move on to something more interesting." The important thing was that the teacher never
blamed the students for being bored with doing the tasks; rather, she pretended that the materials were blamable or sometimes she blamed herself by
saying, "I know I am not always good at conveying things clearly and I would
be happy to repeat myself if you ask." In addition, she encouraged them to
complete a difficult task by saying,"I know this question is a bit difficult, but I'm
sure we can get through it together."
Text Selection Criteria
The texts chosen for this study were checked along the following criteria:
1. The maximum length of each text should be maximally 350 words. The
word-limitation assured us that learners were able to read the whole
text and could recall it.
2. Though all texts used in this study were similar in terms of length and
difficulty level, those used for EDA had an emotional theme, while
those used for the other two conditions (DA and control) were void of
emotional content.
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
225
Reading Comprehension Tasks and Emotional State Evaluation Criteria
First, learners were asked to read the text. The reading test and tasks
were modeled after other widely available standardized tests of reading (e.g.,
TOEFL), and they consisted of texts of one to three paragraphs in length followed by multiple-choice comprehension items. Subjects in the DA and EDA
groups were told that their teacher would give them support and feedback
whenever they needed it. Learners' emotional state was determined by watching the video data and observing each learner's performance independently as
they managed their emotions. Managing emotions includes dealing with a conflict with another peer or the instructor, getting upset over an assignment or
activity, or appearing overtly excited for some reason. To ensure inter-coder
reliability, audio- and video-recorded data were meticulously transcribed and
coded by the instructor and two expert colleagues who were provided with sufficient information regarding the EI framework and were interested in its potential relevance to their own practice as EFL teachers. Using Goleman's five skills
as an EI framework to view students' performance, they were asked to pay attention to the learners' emotional reactions and rate each learner's emotional
state based on a number of criteria provided in Appendix C.
Data Collection and Coding Procedure
The teacher-learner interactions during classroom activities were transcribed and coded by two trained raters and the instructor. Six learners were
randomly selected from each group (DA and EDA), and then using Goleman's
EI framework, the coders independently coded all emotional responses given
by learners and gave each leaner a score out of 20, which resulted in an intercoder reliability rate of .86. Discrepancies between coders were resolved
through discussion and consensus was reached. Then, in order to see whether
learners' scores differed between the DA and EDA conditions in the mediation
process, the graph of the group performances was drawn.
The results of the quantitative analysis carried out by means of descriptive and inferential statistical measures are provided in the following section.
This analysis gauges the learners' TEIQue-ASF scores in the pretest and posttest assessment sessions of the study, and one-way analyses of variance
(ANOVAs) were run to ensure the comparability of the three groups prior to
the study and to find the effect of the intervention on learners' EI in the posttest stage. In addition, a qualitative analysis of the mediation process stage is
described along three extracts: Two extracts show how reading tests were
performed collaboratively through teacher-learner interactions, one for the
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
226
DA condition and the other for the EDA condition. The third excerpt is concerned with EDA learners’ emotional responses during these interactions.
Results
The main hypothesis of the study was that EDA is more effective than
DA, that is, that the EDA group would show higher pre to postteaching gains
than the DA group and that the DA group in turn would score higher than the
control group on TEIQue-ASF. The results of the pretest, mediation process
stage, and posttest are provided in this section.
First Stage: Pretest
A one-way ANOVA was performed on participants’ reading ability scores
and their TEIQue-ASF scores prior to the study. As shown in Table 3, the analysis produced no significant differences among the three conditions: The EDA,
DA and control conditions were similar in terms of both measures prior to the
treatment. This test proved the initial comparability of the three groups.
Table 3 Descriptive and inferential statistics for the pretests
Variables Group n M SD F p
TEIQue-ASF CG 19 114.78 7.67 .157 .855
DA 17 116.17 8.07
EDA 14 117.05 6.90
Reading comprehension CG 19 17.64 2.43 .134 .875
DA 17 18.05 1.98
EDA 14 17.84 2.29
Note. Level of significance is .05
Second Stage: The Mediation Process Stage
As said before, EDA and DA conditions went through mediation processes. During the mediation process, participants read the text twice and they
were offered mediation in the form of some questions, feedback, hints and
prompts. Since instruction and assessment are inseparable in a DA approach,
some information about word meaning and different reading strategies were
provided whenever required.
Here, three examples of the mediation provided (one for the DA condition
and two for the EDA condition) are described. The transcription1
 in the first ex-

1
 Transcription conventions are as follows:
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
227
tract is for the DA condition and occurred immediately after the student named
Sarah had completed answering the items (the reading passage and test items are
provided in Appendix A). The mediator (M) was asking some questions about the
learner’s (S) performance and then stopped to comment on her answers.
Extract 1
1. S: (Sarah finishes reading the text and responding the items)
2. M: Look at Question 2 once more; what is the right answer?
3. S: Isn’t it choice A?љ
4. M: No, that is not the right answer. Look at the sentence once more.
You need to read the whole clause.
5. --- (Sarah thinks)
6. M: Maybe student life is similar, butј- the system of higher educationј (. . .)
7. S: I found it, D?
8. M: What about B and C?
9. S: Mhm, --- it is not C because it doesn’t say about differences in teaching and learning styles and – it is not B becauseљ ---
10. M: (the mediator points to the text) The system is differentј in some
countries of Asia or Middle East, like Iranљ.
11. S: yeahј, so D is the right answer.
As Sarah finished reading the text and answered the items, the intervention started. The mediator asked her to go to the second question once more
(Turn 2). Sarah indicated her doubt by asking “Isn’t it choice A?” with a slightly
falling intonation (Turn 3). In the following turns (4-6), the mediator prompted
Sarah to pay more attention to the text and when she could not find the answer (after a long pause), the mediator oriented her to the clues provided in
the text. This helped Sarah to find the right answer, but to make sure that she
was not guessing it, the mediator did not confirm that she had chosen the
right answer and asked her to comment on the other options. Following a relatively long pause (Turn 9), Sarah said that option C was not correct, but she
was uncertain about the other choice. Once more, the mediator oriented Sa-

- short pause
-- long pause
ооо very long pause
љ shows slightly falling intonaƟon
ј shows slightly rising intonaƟon
parentheses contain researcher's comments
(. . .) indicates that a section of the transcript has been omitted
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
228
rah’s attention to the text with rising intonation, which helped her find the
reason why B was not the right answer (Turn 10).
The following extract occurred about half-way through the EDA program. Prior to giving the reading passage to learners, the instructor provided
them with a short description of how to control one’s feelings and manage
emotions. This extract was designed to enable learners to foster a better understanding of their emotions and help them manage their emotions. Students had just finished reading the passage. Three learners and the instructor
took part in the conversation. The learners’ names were Arina (A), Pani (P) and
Negin (N). Arina started talking about the story. The conversation then turned
to a discussion of emotional states of characters and learners’ experiences of
similar circumstances, instigated by the instructor:
Extract 2
1. M: Tell me more about the characters of the story?
2. A: There was a father and a son.
3. M: Ok, continue. I haven’t read the story. Tell me more.
4. A: Well, it was the son’s graduation party and he --- thought his father
would buy a car for himј butљ -- his father bought a Bible. He, - he
became angry and leaved - no, left his father.
5. M: Ok, Arina. Let me ask you a question (turns to other students). Everybody, think about this question: What would you do if you were instead of that young man?
6. A: I become angry but I do not leave the house.
7. M: Why do you become angry?
8. A: Because, -- Because I was waiting for a car.
9. M: Arina, think about your father.
10. A: (quickly) No, no -- I won’t become angry with my fatherј but I was
waiting for a carљ.
11. M: Uhuh. What about others (turning to other students)
12. N: I don’t become angry. But I would just say thank you (she made a
gesture of disappointment).
13. M: Well - now it is better. What about you Pani?
14. P: I would ask him.
15. M: What would you tell him?
16. P: I wanted a car, daddy. Where is my car?љ
17. M: I liked it. Be frank with your father - ask him. It gives both of you a better feeling. Put yourself in your father’s shoes then decide what the best
reaction to show is. Thanks everyone. Let's go to the rest of the story.
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
229
In Extract 2, it is the mediator who initiates the discussion and asks one of
the learners (Arina) to narrate the story. In order to encourage her to give further
information, the mediator pretends that she is unaware of the story and seeks
further information from her (Turn 3). In the following turn (5), the mediator,
going round the class, encourages the learners to think about the character's feelings. Then, students start talking about their feelings while the mediator is trying
to teach them how to manage their emotions and at the same time handle their
relationships. By asking them to think about the young man and put themselves in
his shoes, she tries to teach them that it is better to understand one's own feelings (self-awareness) and practice managing one’s emotions to become ready for
interaction with others. In Turn 10, Arina shows that she is concerned about her
father's feelings (“I won't become angry with my father”), while simultaneously
she appears to be aware of her own feelings (“but I was waiting for a car”).
Negin's statement (Turn 12) shows that she is able to manage her emotions and is
considerate of others' feelings. Pani (Turns 14-16) uses a better strategy; by asking
her father about the car and being frank with him she satisfies her own feelings as
well as her father's. Consequently, the mediator's statements in Turn 17 aim to
encourage the learners to change the emotional lens of anger into a sympathetic
reaction in such a challenging situation.
The conversation in the following extract took place immediately after that
in Extract 2. In Extract 3, which is for the EDA condition, a student named Maryam
(Ma) had completed answering the items (the reading passage and test items are
provided in Appendix B). The mediator was asking some questions about her
Maryam’s performance and then stopped to comment on her answers.
Extract 3
1. M: I just want to ask you to think about the answer of the second
question once more.
2. Ma: Storm doesn’t mean shout?ј
3. M: Well -- what do you think? Did you choose it because of “raised his
voice”?
4. Ma: Mhm (she thinks).
5. M: What do you do when you are angry?
6. Ma: I -- shout, mhm (searching for a word) -- shoutљ (she reads the
text once more) no, is it make furious?љ
7. M: What does furious mean Maryam?
8. Ma: Angryј.
9. M: Yeah. But, make furious? Did he make someone furious?
10. Ma: No, no, no -- (she thinks). Is it move angrily?
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
230
11. M: Mhm. What about choice D?
12. Ma: Making delighted?ј No, it is not correct.
13. M: Why?
14. Ma: -- Delighted means something like -- happy ---. But he was -- angry.
15. M: Yep, that’s it. Excellent.
When Maryam finished reading the text and the questions, the mediator
asked her to go to one of the questions, for which she had chosen the incorrect
answer. By prompting her to have another attempt, she indirectly informed her
that the answer was not correct. It should be mentioned that in these interactions most often a second attempt was offered rather than say directly that the
answer was correct (when there was the probability of guessing) or incorrect.
Maryam showed her uncertainty by asking “Storm doesn’t mean shout?” (Turn
2). The mediator, knowing that the previous sentence had misguided the student, asked her to think more (Turn 3). Her next response (“make furious”) and
the following turns (6-8) provided evidence that she had understood the text,
but was not familiar with the exact meaning of the term and tried to guess the
meaning from the context. After providing the correct response (Turn 10), the
mediator asked her to think about the last option to make sure that she was
familiar with the meaning of the term delighted. Maryam’s response in Turn 14
made the mediator sure that she knew the meaning.
The learners in the EDA condition clearly showed their enthusiasm and
interest in performing the reading comprehension activities and attempts to
find the meaning of other emotional words. In addition, they were all ready to
discuss the passage and its content after doing the reading activities. What
one of the learners named Sahar (Sa) said in Extract 4 as she commented on
her experience of having learning support illustrates the learners’ attitudes.
Extract 4
1. Sa: I had a very, very good feeling.
2. M: Tell me why you had such feeling.
3. Sa: You know, it is like as if I can go and have an exam without being
anxious anymore. I mean,-- I don't say that I will answer all questions
but I’m sure that I will remember all the things I've been through and
negative emotions will not hamper my performance.
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
231
Third Stage: Posttest
To provide a plausible answer to our research question, the TEIQue-ASF
scores of the three conditions were tested by ANOVAs and the findings, presented in Table 4, revealed that the performance in terms of the EI scores of
each condition differed significantly. The Sidak test for multiple post-hoc comparisons was used to determine which of the mean scores differed significantly from the others. As Table 5 shows, the EDA condition was found to be significantly different from the other conditions, with EDA > DA, EDA > CG. The DA
condition differed significantly from the CG, with DA > CG. Thus, subjects’ engagement in the EDA procedures, which was used as the treatment given to
the experimental group, positively impacted their EI scores on the posttest.
Furthermore, there is good evidence to suggest that exposing learners to DA
procedures had a positive effect on the emotional state of EFL learners.
Table 4 Descriptive and inferential statistics for posttest
Variable Condition n M SD F p
TEIQue-ASF EDA 14 137.21 7.77 13.742 .000*
DA 17 128.59 8.43
CG 19 120.53 10.36
*p < .05
Table 5 Multiple comparisons
(I) Condition
(J) Condition
Mean Difference (I-J)
SE p 95% Confidence Interval
Lower Bound Upper Bound
EDA DA 8.62605*
3.26949 .033 .5314 16.7207
CG 16.68797*
3.19083 .000 8.7881 24.5879
DA EDA -8.62605*
3.26949 .033 -16.7207 -.5314
CG 8.06192*
3.02439 .031 .5741 15.5498
CG EDA -16.68797*
3.19083 .000 -24.5879 -8.7881
DA -8.06192*
3.02439 .031 -15.5498 -.5741
* p < .05
Next, emotional responses provided by the randomly selected informants during mediation procedures were analyzed to find their emotional states
(scores were given out of 20) and then their performance graph was drawn.
The mean scores in Figure 1 appear to point to an improvement in EI level of
both conditions. As can be seen, the lines for the two conditions (EDA and DA)
are rather close in the beginning sessions but become diverge considerably in
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
232
the following tests.2
 What is particularly interesting about the quantitative
data obtained in the mediation process is that it shows an up-and-down pattern in means and SD values. In addition, examination of the SDs shows that
there was more variation among DA learners. This, in our view, indicates that
the development of EI was anything but linear.
Figure 1 Mean EI scores during intervention sessions for the EDA and DA conditions
Discussion and Conclusion
The major hypothesis of this study was that learners in the EDA condition would show higher levels of achievement in EI than learners in the DA
condition or the control condition. The findings confirmed the hypothesis by
showing that the EDA condition increased its performance from pre to
postteaching more than the other two conditions. Furthermore, the results of
the ANOVA pointed to the positive effects of DA on learners’ EI in comparison
to the control condition.
The increase observed in the EI scores of the DA condition can be explained by the fact that when learners become aware of the learning goals and
assessment procedures, they can determine their expectations of success,
which in turn enhance their motivation and help them “regulate how they
learn with more certainty” (Wlodkowski, 2008, p. 202). In the DA procedures,
learners were asked to comment about assessment and give their suggestions.

2 We cannot have the control group in this graph as there was no record of their performance during the experiment; we have only their pre/posttest scores.
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
233
They were provided with some models of successful task completion and in
this way the mysteries about assessment criteria were decreased and they
were able to self-assess more easily.
In addition, the observed significant differences between the scores of
EDA and DA conditions could be attributed to the influence of the EDA procedures with their numerous opportunities for direct exposure to emotional activities. This finding is consistent with our prediction and provides further empirical
support for Abdolrezapour and Tavakoli’s (2012) findings, which pointed to the
possibility of enhancing one’s EI through extensive exposure to emotional activities. Nevertheless, a question may arise as to why the participants’ EI, which is
part of their personalities, had risen so much in such a short period of time. This
question, however, may be answered if one considers two important issues.
First, although the treatment period was relatively short, participants had quite
an intensive exposure to EDA procedures and emotional texts that raised EI.
Second, despite the commonsensical belief that personality traits do not change
over time, there is now ample evidence in support of the fact that many traits
could be changed if the individual is motivated enough (Haslam, Bastian, Fox, &
Whelan, 2007; Helson, Kwan, John, & Jones, 2002).
Despite the role of emotion in many educational settings, and its potential to both support and damage learning, understanding emotion remains a
minority interest. What is more, the research that is undertaken tends to be
correlational in nature rather than experimental. Our findings add a new dimension to the available empirical literature (e.g., Nelis et al., 2009; Nelis et
al., 2011) on the possibility of enhancing one’s EI through some kinds of interventions and on applicability of DA to gain better understanding of learners’
emotions (e.g., Holzman, 2009). Considering the documented empirical and
theoretical evidence in support of the positive relationships between EI and L2
performance (Abdolrezapour & Tavakoli, 2012; Dewaele, 2005, 2008; Dewaele
et al., 2008), the improvement observed in learners’ EI states would possibly
lead to an enhancement of their performance in language learning.
The results of this study lay a path between emotion, cognition and assessing learner’s performance and establish a solid basis for the integration of
EI within teaching and assessment tasks and using them to improve one’s performance. Some steps have been taken in the current attempt that need backing from institutions’ principals, parents and teachers for a significant leap
forward. The activities proposed here are teacher-friendly and they can be
easily incorporated into any L2 instructional setting with learners from different age groups. Of course, it should be pointed that the intervention of EDA
involves far more than promoting one’s EI; in effect, it has the potential to
help learners become more socially competent and offers them access to a
Parisa Abdolrezapour, Mansoor Tavakoli, Saeed Ketabi
234
range of knowledge and abilities which might enable them to achieve better
performance in the academic context and in their social life.
As for the pedagogical implications, this study provides evidence that
emotions can be successfully integrated into DA procedures in EFL classrooms
for young beginners and are at least as moderately effective as far as learners’
reading comprehension is concerned. Hence, one implication of this study is
that mediations designed for EFL classrooms might address the needs and preferences of certain students taking into account learners’ individual differences
and more importantly their emotions, resulting in more motivating tasks.
Implications for Future Studies
This study is an example of an initial and promising attempt that leaves
ample room for future research to probe or refine its findings. First, the participant sample was a small group of intermediate learners and it was composed
only of females, which might delimit the generalizability scope of this study. It
is obvious that studies with ESL and EFL learners of lower proficiency of English
are likely to show different results. In this light, future work would benefit
from replicating the research with learner groups of different levels of proficiency, different age groups and including both sexes. Second, the study was
conducted over a 2-month period during which participants were exposed to
intensive emotional activities and language input and instruction from various
sources. This being the case, the internal validity of the study might be questioned; however, given the existence of a control condition, similar to the DA
condition in many ways (the same instructor, the same amount of time devoted to reading activities, etc.) this criticism may be in part overcome. Nevertheless, there is a need for future extended and methodologically rigorous investigations to further explore and (re)examine the role of EI in DA procedures
and its effect on various language skills.
Although every attempt was made to avoid some of the design, measurement, and analytical flaws, there were some limitations that need to be taken into account in future research. First, one may object to the reliability of the
study considering the exact amount and type of intervention in the EDA and DA
conditions. While the type, intensity and frequency of intervention provided to
the EDA group might have been more than what learners needed, in the case of
the DA condition, it might have been less than what they needed. In consequence, this imbalance might have caused the difference in scores. In order to
address this issue, the instructor tried to limit her intervention to what was actually needed for learners to achieve improved performance, but it still remains
a challenge for the outcomes of the study. Secondly, the transfer of these re-
Enhancing learner’s emotion in an L2 context through emotionalized dynamic assessment
235
sults to learners’ long-term gains in performance might be questioned. In order
to tackle this objection, there is a need to introduce both static and dynamic
assessments as well as other sources of information rather than gauge
achievement on a number of limited tests. In addition, there is a need for further studies to address the direct effect of EDA intervention on learners’ reading
comprehension and L2 learning. Finally, group sizes were small, as a result of
which statistical analyses may lose force; thus, future attempts might apply
larger samples and run more in-depth qualitative analyses. 