Volunteering by Chance’’ to Promote
Civic Responsibility and Civic Engagement:
Does It Work?
MASSIMO SANTINELLO
Department of Developmental and Social Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
FRANCESCA CRISTINI
Department of Psychology, University of Valle d’Aosta, Valle d’Aosta, Italy
ALESSIO VIENO
Department of Developmental and Social Psychology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
LUCA SCACCHI
Department of Psychology, University of Valle d’Aosta, Valle d’Aosta, Italy
This study investigated the effectiveness of a program to promote
civic responsibility and prevent antisocial behavior in a sample
of Italian adolescents. Participants were 83 Italian male adolescents, attending the second year of high school (Mean age ¼ 15.79;
15.79; SD ¼ 0.87). In order to test the efficacy of different strategies
(in-classroom training and service activity in a voluntary organization) we divided students into two experimental groups—one
classroom of students participated in both strategies (training þ
volunteering group) and another classroom only participated in
the training (training only group)—and one control group. Process and efficacy evaluations were completed. Data were collected
before and following the intervention. The process evaluation
revealed that the program was highly accepted and appreciated
by students. The efficacy evaluation revealed no intervention
effects on civic responsibility. However, the training þ volunteering
We thank Silvia Formentin, Ilaria Vaccari, Elena Tessari, and Paolo Pietrantoni for their
contribution to the realization of the project. We also thank all the students, school teachers,
school administrators, and each member of the local voluntary organizations for contributing
to this project. This study was supported by a grant from the Italian Ministry of University and
Research (MIUR), Protocol no. 2008STEEJB_003.
Address correspondence to Francesca Cristini, Department of Psychology, University of
Valle d’Aosta, Aosta, Italy. E-mail: f.cristini@univda.it
Journal of Prevention & Intervention in the Community, 40:64–79, 2012
Copyright # Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 1085-2352 print=1540-7330 online
DOI: 10.1080/10852352.2012.633068
64
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
group reported a significant decrease in antisocial behavior after
the program. Thus, the program was effective in preventing antisocial behavior but not in promoting civic responsibility in our
sample.
KEYWORDS antisocial behavior, civic engagement, civic
responsibility, school-based program, service activities
Civic responsibility, defined as ‘‘attitudes and behaviours that are beneficial
to society, particularly prosocial community and political attitudes and behaviours’’ (Da Silva, Sanson, Smart, & Toumbourou, 2004, p. 230), is considered
to be an important component of healthy and positive development. In terms
of theory, Erikson (1982) has suggested that the development of community
awareness is important for personal development, particularly for the development of identity which involves the search of a sense of self that enables
both individual and societal needs to be met. Empirically, high levels of adolescent civic responsibility have been found to be positively associated with
good psychosocial adjustment (Hart & Fegley, 1995) and negatively associated with antisocial and problem behavior (Zeldin, 2004). Furthermore, civic
responsibility is required for the effective functioning of democratic society
(Flanagan & Sherrod, 1998) and it can be an indicator of social capital
(Prince, 2002). While adopting this perspective, the present study aimed to
test the efficacy of a program called ‘‘Volontari per Caso’’ (‘‘Voluntary by
Chance’’), in order to promote civic responsibility and engagement, and to
prevent antisocial behavior in a sample of Italian adolescents.
The program was based on the Social Development Model (SDM,
Catalano & Hawkins, 1996). The SDM, originally developed to explain antisocial=prosocial behavior development (Hawkins, Catalano, & Miller, 1992),
received many empirical confirmations concerning explanation of psychosocial adjustment. As regards civic responsibility, Da Silva et al. (2004) found
that the SDM, in comparison with other models, has the most predictive
value for civic responsibility development. Additionally, peer related factors
such as peer attachment, peer encouragement and peer participation in service activities were the strongest predictors of civic responsibility during adolescence (Da Silva et al., 2004). Regarding the validity of the SDM toward
antisocial=prosocial behavior, research has demonstrated the capacity of
this model to explain antisocial=prosocial behavior development and its
usefulness in informing the design of prevention and promotion programs
(Catalano & Hawkins, 1996; Hawkins, Catalano, Kosterman, Abbott, & Hill,
1999). The SDM outlined the following key variables for the development
of prosocial=civic attitudes and behaviors: perceived opportunities for
prosocial=civic involvement; actual involvement; perceived rewards for
involvement; attachment to like others; belief in prosocial values. Using
Civic Responsibility, Antisocial Behavior, Training, and Service Activities 65
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
the theoretical basis of the SDM, the program Volontari per Caso was
designed to promote these factors jointly.
As far as opportunities and actual involvement in prosocial=civic activities are concerned, literature suggests the relevance of school-based programs and service activities to offer opportunities for prosocial=civic
engagement. Participation in school curricular approaches, such as the
provision of opportunities to actively discuss social problems, an open classroom climate and the use of simulations, all contribute to the development of
students’ civic responsibility, civic commitment and skills (Hart, Donnelly,
Youniss, & Atkins, 2007; Kahne & Sporte, 2008; Torney-Purta, Lehmann,
Oswald, & Schulz, 2001; see Gibson & Levine, 2003, for a review). Additionally, participation in service learning or community service is associated with
higher levels of civic responsibility (Metz, McLellan, & Youniss, 2003;
Schmidt, Shumow, & Kackar, 2007). For these reasons we decided to
implement a program composed of both a school-based training and service
activities in community organizations.
Research has found participation in service activities to be associated
with two main kinds of outcomes: a positive association with civic responsibility and the expectation of future commitment to service; a negative association with problem and antisocial behavior. On one hand, students involved
in service activities, as part of school or community-based program and community service, reported a significant increase in civic responsibility and civic
engagement (Metz et al., 2003; Metz & Youniss, 2005; Schmidt et al., 2007),
more awareness of the multiple dimensions of social problems (Batchelder
& Root, 1994) and an increased commitment to community service and intention to continue such service in the future (Reed, Jernstedt, Hawley, Reber, &
Dubois, 2005; Wilson, Allen, Strahan, & Ethier, 2008). On the other hand,
research has shown the effect of service learning and community service participation on reducing or preventing adolescent problem behavior; these studies report that engaging in service activity can reduce antisocial behavior,
at-risk behavior, and disciplinary problems (Vieno, Nation, Perkins, &
Santinello, 2007; Zeldin, 2004; Youniss, McLellan, Su, & Yates, 1999).
Based on the SDM and on the previously described literature concerning the role of service activities, the Volontari per Caso program aimed to
promote civic responsibility and to reduce antisocial behavior using two
broad strategies: classroom training and service activity in community voluntary organizations.
THE PRESENT STUDY
In short, this study focuses on the analysis of students’ evaluation, appreciation, and acceptance of the program Volontari per Caso (process evaluation), and, subsequently, aims to test the effectiveness of the program
66 M. Santinello et al.
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
(efficacy evaluation). The first aim was to investigate whether students liked,
accepted, and appreciated the program. Secondly, we wanted to examine the
efficacy of the program in promoting civic responsibility and reducing antisocial behavior. To test the efficacy of the two program’s strategies we realized two experimental groups and one control group: one classroom of
students participated in both the training and the service activity (training þ volunteering group); one classroom only participated in the training
(training only group); one classroom did not participate in any activities
(control group). We assumed that, after the program: (1) Adolescents in
the training only group will report an increased level of civic responsibility
in comparison to the control group (Hart et al., 2007; Torney-Purta et al.,
2001; Gibson & Levine, 2003). (2) Adolescents in the training þ volunteering
group will report an increased level of civic responsibility in comparison to
both the control group and those who only participated in the training (Metz
et al., 2003; Metz & Youniss, 2005; Schmidt et al., 2007). (3) Adolescents in
the training þ volunteering group will report a decreased level of antisocial
behavior in comparison to both the control group and those who only participated in the training (Vieno et al., 2007; Zeldin, 2004; Youniss et al., 1999).
(4) Adolescents in the training þ volunteering group will report higher levels
of intention for civic engagement after the end of the program (Reed et al.,
2005; Wilson et al., 2008).
METHOD
The ‘‘Volontari per Caso’’ Program
The Volontari per Caso program is a comprehensive intervention program for
the promotion of civic responsibility and the prevention of antisocial behavior.
Based on the SDM (Catalano & Hawkins, 1996), the program was designed to
give opportunities for prosocial=civic involvement, to promote actual involvement in service activities and belief in prosocial values, to recognize rewards for
this involvement and to promote positive attachment to prosocial people and
organizations. To reach these objectives, the program involved two broad strategies: school-based training developed in the classroom and service activity in
local community voluntary organizations. Both strategies were implemented
during an entire school year in a high school, involving two experimental
groups: a training þ volunteering group and a training only group.
Training involved sessions of two hours, every two weeks, from
the beginning to the end of the school year. It took place in the classroom during school time. It was composed of activities aimed at promoting reflection on social issues, work group competence, communication
competence, self-efficacy, and empowerment. A summary description
of the training activities is reported in Table 1. Two groups=classrooms
(training þ volunteering group and training only group) attended the same
Civic Responsibility, Antisocial Behavior, Training, and Service Activities 67
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
training contents and activities; the only differences in the classroom training
between two groups were the following: for the final conference, students of
training þ volunteering group organized a presentation about the voluntary
organizations they attended, whereas students of the training only group
TABLE 1 Summary Description of the Training Activities Developed in the Classroom
Meetings Activities
1 Introduction to the program, sharing of the program objectives and activities.
The students are asked to think and come up with a ‘‘logo’’ for the program.
2 Presentation of the leaders of the voluntary organizations involved in the program.
3 ‘‘Ball of wool’’ game: the game aimed to get to know each other and share personal
information about preferences, qualities, and characters.
4 Sharing of the regulation and rules to be followed during the program.
Discussion about ‘‘What does civic responsibility mean, in your opinion? What signs
of civic responsibility can you see among your friends, in your neighbourhood or
in wider society?’’
5 Voting to decide on the ‘‘logo’’ for the program.
‘‘How many As are there in A’’ game: the game aimed to reflect on communication
styles and abilities.
6 ‘‘Black and white’’ game: the game aimed to reflect on and learn about strategies for
explaining and arguing for personal opinions, for listening and understanding
other opinions, for finding a solution that takes into consideration the opinions of
different people. This exercise is intended as a symbolic representation of a
democratic society.
Introduction to the organization of the final conference: it was suggested that the
students should organize this public event with the aim of ‘‘asserting their voice.’’
Students of the training only group decided to present, as a topic for the
conference, a social problem related to adolescent life; the topic was chosen by
students themselves, they were divided in four groups, each group presented one
of the following topics: family, emotions, drug use, violence. Students of the
training þvolunteering group aimed to present to the conference the mission of
the organization they attended and their experience in this organization.
7 ‘‘The three’’ game: the game aimed to understand the relevance of group work, the
interdependence between different elements of a group, and the effects of
effective collaboration
Explanation and discussion of strategies for organizing the final conference.
8 Preparation of the instruments for the final conference: poster, power point
presentations, pictures, and interviews.
Lesson about how to conduct an interview to collect information about people’s
opinions on a specific topic.
9 Lesson about photography and practical experience to learn how to document
personal opinions through pictures.
10 Lesson about technical aspects of photography.
Division in subgroups of students to prepare the interview data and pictures for the
conference.
11 Division in subgroups of students to prepare the power point presentations for the
conference.
12 Sharing of materials, experiences and opinions of different subgroups about the
conference.
13 Simulation of the presentation at the conference, finding solutions for
organizational problems related to the conference. It was explained that the
solution needs to be found through common agreement.
14 Final conference.
68 M. Santinello et al.
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
completed a presentation about a social issue chosen by themselves.
Training was developed and conducted by two PhD psychology students;
additionally two undergraduate psychology students were involved to carry
out activities in the classroom.
Voluntary activity in local community organizations was attended by
the students for two hours, every two weeks, throughout the entire school
year. At the beginning of the program, voluntary organization leaders
described the mission and activities of their organization and the contribution
that students could make through voluntary activity. Students could choose
the voluntary organization in which to spend time volunteering, deciding
on the basis of their desires, preferences, abilities, and the presence of other
classmates, given that these variables constitute relevant predictors of civic
responsibility development and service participation (Da Silva et al., 2004).
Students attended voluntary organizations during school time because the
program was organized as part of the school curriculum. Students were
involved in different activities, depending on the mission of the organization
they volunteered in.1
Evaluation Study
In order to obtain descriptive information about program implementation
and to test program efficacy (Lipsey & Cordray, 2000; Leone & Prezza,
2003), both process evaluation and efficacy evaluation of the program were
completed. The process evaluation collected information about the perception of classroom training activities and the perception of collaboration
and work group with classmates during these activities, by a questionnaire.
Additionally, for the training þ volunteering group, we analyzed the perception of service activities in the organizations and the perception of relationships with other volunteers. This information is relevant because negative
perceptions and dissatisfaction with program contents could reduce program
efficacy (Lipsey & Cordray, 2000).
Efficacy evaluation tested the program efficacy as regards the promotion
of civic responsibility and the reduction of antisocial behaviors. For the efficacy evaluation, we used a longitudinal quasi-experimental design to test program effects on civic responsibility, intention to engage in civic activities and
antisocial behavior. A questionnaire was administered to the students in two
waves: at the beginning of the school year, before the program started (Wave
1); at the end of the school year, when the program was completed (Wave 2).
Sample
The program was implemented in an Italian technical high school. Two
classes participated at the program and two classes were selected as a control
group. Classes were selected by the teachers among classes at the second
Civic Responsibility, Antisocial Behavior, Training, and Service Activities 69
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
year of high school. In total, the sample was composed of 83 male students;
30.1% (n ¼ 25) students were in the training þ volunteering group and 27.7%
(n ¼ 23) in the training only group. Mean age was 15.79 (SD ¼ 0.87). As
regards the attrition rate, from the total sample eight students were missing
at the posttest (Wave 2): three control group students, two training only
group students, and three training þ volunteering group students.
MEASURES
Process Evaluation Measures
PERCEPTION OF TRAINING ACTIVITIES
Students were asked to evaluate classroom training activities by six items
analyzing the following dimension: interesting=uninteresting, useful=
useless, pleasant=unpleasant, involving=boring, new=ordinary, important=
unimportant (Cronbach a ¼ 0.81). Each aspect was rated by a 5-point Likert
scale between two opposite adjectives representing a continuum for each
dimension.
PERCEPTION OF COLLABORATION AND GROUP WORK BETWEEN CLASSMATES
Students were asked to evaluate collaboration and group work between
classmates during training activities by a scale of 8 items (Cronbach
a ¼ 0.71). Item example: ‘‘During training activities the collaboration between
classmates produced creative and new ideas.’’ Responses were measured on
a 4-point Likert scale from ‘‘false’’ to ‘‘true.’’
PERCEPTION OF ACTIVITIES IN THE VOLUNTARY ORGANIZATIONS
The perception of service activities was measured by three items (Cronbach
a ¼ 0.77). Item example: ‘‘Service activities were interesting and pleasant.’’
Responses were measured on a 5-point Likert scale from ‘‘completely disagree’’ to ‘‘completely agree.’’
PERCEPTION OF RELATIONSHIPS WITH OTHER VOLUNTEERS
Relationships with other volunteers was measured by two items: ‘‘In the
organization people are kind to me,’’ ‘‘Tutors in the organizations are worthwhile people’’ (Cronbach a ¼ 0.60). Responses ranged on a 5-point Likert
scale from ‘‘completely disagree’’ to ‘‘completely agree.’’
70 M. Santinello et al.
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
Efficacy Evaluation Measures
CIVIC RESPONSIBILITY
Civic responsibility was measured with a 10-item scale mainly based on the
Civic Responsibility Survey (Cristini, Santinello, & Formentin, 2009; Furco,
Muller, & Ammon, 1998; Service-Learning Research & Development Center,
1999). The scale was composed of two subscales: interpersonal civic
responsibility (7 items such as ‘‘I like to be involved in activities aimed at
guaranteeing equal social, political and occupational rights for all people’’;
Cronbach a: 0.86 at Wave 1, 0.88 at Wave 2) and environmental civic
responsibility (3 items such as ‘‘I like to be involved in activities aimed at
making my neighbourhood=city more secure and pleasant’’; Cronbach a:
0.62 at Wave 1, 0.59 at Wave 2). Responses were measured on a 7-point
Likert scale from ‘‘completely disagree’’ to ‘‘completely agree.’’
ANTISOCIAL BEHAVIOR
Antisocial behavior was assessed by a 12-item scale (Vieno, Nation, Pastore,
& Santinello, 2009). Participants were asked to indicate how often they were
involved in antisocial behaviors in reference to the last month. Item example:
‘‘Have you ever stolen something in a shop?’’ Responses were on a 6-point
scale, from ‘‘never’’ to ‘‘more than 20 times.’’ Alpha coefficients ranged from
0.88 (Wave 1) to 0.84 (Wave 2).
INTENTION FOR FUTURE CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
Students were asked to rate their intention to continue to be engaged in voluntary activities in the community organization, after the end of the program.
This question was only reported for the students of training þ volunteerism
group at the beginning and at the end of service activities.
Analysis
For the process evaluation, we analyzed the percentages of each of the items
of the process evaluation measures. Percentages for the single items were
analyzed separately for two experimental groups (training þ volunteering
group; training only group). Subsequently, a one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was used to test differences between two experimental groups
on process variables.
As regards efficacy evaluation, in order to analyze baseline equivalence
for students in three groups (training þ volunteering group; training only
group; control group) we used an ANOVA. To analyze changes on civic
responsibility and antisocial behavior from Wave 1 to Wave 2, we used
Generalized Linear Model for repeated measures (factor within subjects: Time;
Civic Responsibility, Antisocial Behavior, Training, and Service Activities 71
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
factor between subjects: Group). To analyze changes on the item measuring
intention to engage in voluntary activities we used the Wilcoxon test.
RESULTS
Process Evaluation
We analyzed descriptive statistics of indicators used to evaluate students’
perception of training activities, collaboration between classmates during
training, activities in the voluntary organizations, relationships with other
volunteers. As regards students’ perception of training activities, the majority
of the students in the training only group evaluated training activities as
highly interesting (50.0%), useful (45.0%), pleasant (66.7%), involving
(55.0%), new (73.7%), and important (36.8%); similar results were reported
by students in the training þ volunteerism group: highly interesting
(60.9%), useful (47.8%), pleasant (69.6%), involving (39.1%), new (69.6%),
and important (39.1%).
As regards students’ perception of collaboration and work group
between classmates during training, both in the training only group and in
the training þ volunteering group, the majority of the students reported a
positive evaluation of the collaboration between classmates during training.
Example percentages of answers to items ‘‘completely and quite agree’’
include: 71.4% (training only group) and 77.3% (training þ volunteering
group) for the item ‘‘When I worked with classmates in a group I felt like
I worked better’’; 76.2% (training only group) and 81.8% (training þ
volunteering group) for the item ‘‘Collaboration between classmates
produced creative and new ideas’’; 81.0% (training only group) and 72.7%
(training þ volunteering group) for the item ‘‘Work in a group makes friendships with classmates stronger.’’ The only exceptions were the items ‘‘During
group work it is difficult to find agreement’’ (for both groups), ‘‘I felt that difficulties and problems could be better solved in a group with classmates
other than by myself’’ and ‘‘Group work generates antipathy’’ (for training
only group), to which students reported a negative evaluation.
There were no statistically significant differences between training only
group and training þ volunteering group as regards both perception of training activities (F(1, 37) ¼ 0.06; p > .05) and perception of collaboration and
group work (F(1, 38) ¼ 1.12; p > .05).
Perceptions of activities in the organizations and perceptions of the
relationships with other volunteers were positively evaluated by the
majority of the students in the training þ volunteering group. The majority
of the students liked activities in the organizations (81.8%), evaluated these
activities as interesting and pleasant (91.3%), and reported that thanks to
these activities ‘‘I’m learning new things and acquiring new knowledge’’
(60.9%). Tutors of the students in the voluntary organizations were
72 M. Santinello et al.
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
described as valuable people (95.5%) and other volunteers as kindly
people (90.5%).
Efficacy Evaluation
Subsequently, we analyzed the data concerning program effects. The first
step was to compare baseline values of civic responsibility and antisocial
behavior for students in the three groups (control group; training only;
training þ volunteering group). There were no statistically significant differences at the baseline between the three groups (interpersonal civic responsibility: F(2, 74) ¼ 1.65; p > .05; environmental civic responsibility: F(2, 75) ¼ 1.65;
p > .05; antisocial behavior: F(2, 73) ¼ 2.66; p > .05).
The second step was to analyze change on target variables between
three groups. Results of the Generalized Linear Models for repeated
measures are reported in Table 2.
As far as civic responsibility is concerned, results of the GLM for
repeated measures did not show statistically significant interaction for Time- #Group, neither for interpersonal civic responsibility nor for environmental
civic responsibility. There was a statistically significant main effect of Time
both for interpersonal civic responsibility (F(1, 65) ¼ 9.53; p < .01) and for
environmental civic responsibility (F(1, 68) ¼ 6.24; p < .05). These results
showed that the level of civic responsibility decreased in all three groups,
and that this decrease in civic responsibility did not significantly differ
between the three subgroups of students (training þ volunteering group;
training only group; control group).
As regards to antisocial behavior, results of the GLM for repeated measures showed a statistically significant interaction Time#Group (F(2, 63) ¼ 5.80;
p < .01), and a statistically significant main effect of Time (F(1, 63) ¼ 4.07;
p < .05). These results and observation of mean values showed that levels
of antisocial behavior decreased exclusively in the training þ volunteering
group (Wave 1: mean ¼ 2.27; Wave 2: mean ¼ 1.69); students in the training
only group (Wave 1: mean ¼ 1.86; Wave 2: mean ¼ 1.94) and students in the
control group (Wave 1: mean ¼ 1.68; Wave 2: mean ¼ 1.67) did not report a
significant decrease in antisocial behavior (Figure 1).
TABLE 2 Results of Generalized Linear Models for Repeated Measures
Within subjects effects Between subjects
effects
Time Time# Group Group
Interpersonal civic responsibility F(1, 65) ¼ 9.53## F(2, 65) ¼ 0.32 F(2, 65) ¼ 1.11
Environmental civic responsibility F(1, 68) ¼ 6.24# F(2, 68) ¼ 0.20 F(2, 68) ¼ 1.54
Antisocial behavior F(1, 63) ¼ 4.07# F(2, 63) ¼ 5.80## F(2, 63) ¼ 1.04
Note. #p < .05. ##p < .01.
Civic Responsibility, Antisocial Behavior, Training, and Service Activities 73
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
Finally, as far as the intention to remain engaged in voluntary activities
in the future is concerned, the results of the Wilcoxon test showed that there
were no statistically significant differences between Wave 1 and Wave 2 for
the students in the training þ volunteering group.
DISCUSSION
In the present study, we aimed to investigate students’ evaluation and
appreciation of the program Volontari per Caso and subsequently to test
the effectiveness of the program. The first aim was to analyze whether students liked, accepted and appreciated the program, through process evaluation. Second, we examined program effects as regards civic responsibility,
antisocial behavior, and intention for civic engagement. Process evaluation
showed expected results while efficacy evaluation showed mixed results.
Results of the process evaluation showed a positive evaluation of the
students for both classroom training and service activities in the voluntary
organizations. The majority of the students evaluated training activities as
interesting, useful, pleasant, involving, new, and important; additionally they
reported positive judgment as regard the collaboration and group work
between classmates during training. In addition, activities in the voluntary
organizations and relationships with other volunteers were positively evaluated for the majority of the students of the training þ volunteering group. In
short, these results showed that program activities were highly accepted and
appreciated by the students.
As far as efficacy evaluation is concerned, results showed that the program Volontari per Caso was not effective in promoting civic responsibility
and intention to be engaged in voluntary activities; on the other hand, the full
FIGURE 1 Mean value of antisocial behavior, for the three groups (control group; training þ
volunteering group; training only group).
74 M. Santinello et al.
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
version of the program (training þ volunteering group) was effective in
reducing antisocial behavior. We did not find positive effects on civic
responsibility for both of the two experimental groups; this result was contrary to our hypothesis for the training only group (Hart et al., 2007; TorneyPurta et al., 2001; Gibson & Levine, 2003) and for the training þ volunteering
group (Metz et al., 2003; Metz & Youniss, 2005; Schmidt et al., 2007). As the
level of civic responsibility decreased in all three groups, we may hypothesize that this decrease is related to developmental processes and future studies need to longitudinally test this hypothesis. Furthermore, the hypothesis
concerning intention for future civic engagement (Reed et al., 2005; Wilson
et al., 2008) was not confirmed. Instead, results concerning antisocial behavior confirmed our hypothesis (Vieno et al., 2007; Zeldin, 2004; Youniss
et al., 1999).
First of all, as we are aware of some limitations of this study, we do not
want to argue, based on these results, that service activities and school based
programs are ineffective in promoting civic responsibility and civic engagement. We need to outline that these results can not be generalized as they
were obtained on a small sample. A limitation of the study is indeed the relative small sample size, which limits statistical power of the analysis. Additionally, because the small sample size, we could not compare the effects among
different volunteer organizations=sites. Future implementation and evaluation of the program on a larger sample is needed. Further limitations of
the study should be noted. The program was realized in a specific kind of
school: a technical high school, which in Italy is usually attended by students
of families with low socioeconomic status (SES), in comparison with other
kinds of high school. Future studies should test the program in different
school contexts. Additionally, all data regarding process and efficacy evaluation are based on self-reports by students; future studies should try to utilize
additional sources of data by teachers, program and voluntary organization
leaders, and external observations.
Despite these limitations, results of the present study offer some suggestions concerning promotion of civic responsibility and prevention of antisocial behavior. In any case, we can make some preliminary suggestions
and interpretations about the obtained and unobtained effects of the program. Results about civic responsibility and intention to be engaged in voluntary activities lead us to think critically about the effects of required versus
voluntary service (Schmidt et al., 2007). In our program, service activities
were part of school curriculum and they were required during school time.
The practices of requiring a service has been debated and some argue that
requiring voluntary activities is a contradiction and those students who are
not motivated to volunteer on their own will not derive benefits (Raskoff
& Sundeen, 1999). We require additional comparison between compulsory
versus voluntary service to test if compulsory service is an effective way of
promoting civic responsibility. For example, a new version of the program
Civic Responsibility, Antisocial Behavior, Training, and Service Activities 75
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
could be defined in which voluntary activities will only be attended by students whose voluntarily desire to do that; other students could only attend
the training in the classroom.
Another possible explanation for the results about civic responsibility
and intention to be engaged in voluntary activities is linked to the fact that
service activities do not take the form of authentic service learning. Many
research studies have showed positive associations between service learning
participation and civic responsibility (Metz et al., 2003; Metz & Youniss, 2005;
Schmidt et al., 2007). Service learning is defined as ‘‘service activities that are
integrated into the curriculum and purposefully organized in order to follow
academic content, standards, and learning objectives’’ (National Commission
on Service-Learning, 2002; Skinner & Chapman, 1999, reported in Schmidt
et al., 2007, p. 128). In any case, for the Volontari per Caso program, service
activities were defined as part of the school time, but program activities and
objective were not linked to other academic contents and learning objectives.
The experimental school was a technical high school with no contents that
were similar and linked to training contents and service activities. We need
to test similar programs in schools where school subjects and learning objectives include more courses=classes about psychology, civic education,
sociology, and so on.
Additionally, we need to control, in future studies, other variables that
could influence efficacy of the program. For example, baseline attitudes of
students toward voluntary activities and the type of activities required could
influence the efficacy of service activities on civic responsibility and intention
to be engaged in voluntary activities. Some studies showed that students
already inclined to serve reported no advantage from attending service activities; however, students who were less inclined to serve showed marked gains
on civic measures after completing their requirement (Metz & Youniss, 2005).
Other studies (Schmidt et al., 2007; Metz et al., 2003) have reported that the
type of activities (direct interaction with people in need, to help organizations, to help environment=animals) influences the size and kind of effects
of service learning (improvement in grades, civic knowledge, and engagement). Future studies need to use larger samples and analyze the effects of
the civic responsibility promotion program on subgroups of students based
on baseline attitudes toward voluntary activities and the type of chosen
activity.
In short, while taking into consideration the limitations of this study, the
results highlight the potential effects of service learning as a strategy for
reducing antisocial behavior. Our results suggest that service activities combined with classroom training may play a useful role in a comprehensive
approach to health promotion among adolescents. Participation in these
activities can offer opportunities for adult contacts and peer interaction, for
increasing the likelihood of prosocial bonds being formed and consequently
it can show the effect of preventing or reducing antisocial behavior. On the
76 M. Santinello et al.
Downloaded by [francesca cristini] at 01:32 23 January 2012
other hand, we need additional support to find an effective way to use service learning or community service participation as a strategy for promoting
civic responsibility and engagement.