Executive summary
Character education has become one of the fastest growing reform movements in K–12
education today, partially in response to unacceptable levels of student misbehavior and
inadequate endorsement of good character values (Williams 2000). Between 1993 and 2009,
36 states passed laws mandating or recommending some aspect of character education in
schools. Character education programs also have strong support from parents, teachers, and
school administrators (Character Education Partnership 2010; Glanzer and Milzen 2006). But
despite the widespread popularity of such programs, relatively few randomized controlled trials
have examined the impact of these programs on the character traits, behavior, and academic
outcomes of students (What Works Clearinghouse 2007).2
This study examines the impact of the Lessons in Character (LIC) program—an English
language arts–based character education program—on student academic achievement, social
competence, and problem behaviors and, secondarily, on the school environment. The program
consists of literature-based supplementary material aligned with California English language arts
standards and designed to integrate easily into the current English language arts curricula. The
LIC curriculum is designed to be easy to implement in the classroom and to involve minimal
teacher training, which distinguishes the program from other character education programs.
Research questions
The following confirmatory research questions guide this study:
1.	 Do students in grades 4 and 5 who attend schools in the LIC intervention group exhibit
higher scores on measures of academic achievement after two academic years of potential
LIC exposure than their counterparts who attend schools in the control group?
2.	 Do students in grades 4 and 5 who attend schools in the LIC intervention group exhibit
higher scores on measures of social competence after two academic years of potential
LIC exposure than their counterparts who attend schools in the control group?
3.	 Do students in grades 4 and 5 who attend schools in the LIC intervention group exhibit
fewer problem behaviors after two academic years of potential LIC exposure than their
counterparts who attend schools in the control group?
To examine part of the action model linking the LIC program to student outcomes, the study also
examines whether participation in the program is associated with enhancements to two areas of
the school environment. Specifically, the following two confirmatory research questions
involving intermediate outcomes are examined:
4.	 Do teachers and students in the LIC intervention group report greater levels of student
belongingness after two years of program implementation than their counterparts in the
control group?
2
 A recent exception is the evaluation of seven social and character development programs conducted by the Social
and Character Development Research Consortium (2010).
xi

5.	 Do teachers and students in the LIC intervention group report greater levels of school
expectations consistent with character development after two years of program
implementation than their counterparts in the control group?
The confirmatory research questions focus on the impacts of the LIC program after a two-year
implementation period.
Exploratory analyses were conducted to examine potential impacts on the same outcome
measures after one year of program implementation. These analyses were exploratory in the
sense that they were used to obtain preliminary estimates of program impacts that could not be
rigorously tested due to statistical power considerations. The first-year results were not used to
make inferences about the overall effectiveness of the intervention but to provide additional
descriptive information.
Study context and design
Designed as an experimental trial, the study took place from spring 2007 to spring 2010 in
50 California elementary schools with teachers of grades 2–5. This implementation period
corresponded with an economic recession in California (and the nation as a whole) and
substantial school spending reductions and teacher layoffs due to state budget shortfalls in
California.
Participation in the study was voluntary. The intervention involved a one-day training course for
teachers in year 1; teachers who participated in the course were expected to incorporate 19–25
supplementary lessons into their classroom instruction each year for two academic years. No LIC
professional development activities or coaching occurred in year 2 of implementation.3
 Two
cohorts of elementary schools participated in the intervention. Cohort 1 implementation took
place in 2007/08 and 2008/09, with teacher professional development and coaching occurring in
late summer and early fall of year 1 (2007). Cohort 2 schools were recruited in spring 2008, with
teacher professional development occurring in summer/fall 2008/09 and 2009/10. Teachers in
control group schools, meanwhile, continued with their regular professional development
activities and instructional practices. Both cohorts were pooled in the data analyses.
The study was conducted in 50 public elementary schools in California—34 in the Los Angeles
and San Diego Metropolitan Statistical Areas, 13 in northern California, and 3 in central
California. Half of the recruited schools were randomly assigned to an intervention group that
had the opportunity to implement LIC in their 2nd-5th grade classrooms for two consecutive
years, and half were assigned to the control group. The primary impact analyses included 4,683
students who were in grade 4 or 5 in year 2, and the exploratory analyses included 5,674 students
who were in grade 4 or 5 in year 1. Students in the primary analytic sample were present and
obtained parent consent to participate by the beginning of year 1 and were in participating
classrooms when spring year 2 data were collected. Those in the exploratory analytic sample
obtained parent consent by the beginning of year 1 and were in participating classrooms when
spring year 1 data were collected. Students who were enrolled in non-participating teachers’
classrooms–460 students in year 1 and 300 students in year 2–were not included in the analytic
samples.
3
 Teachers who joined the study in year 2 did not receive any training on the use of the curriculum.
xii
Thirty schools were in a large city or on the urban fringe of a large city, six in a mid-size city
(population of 25,000–250,000), and fourteen in a small town or rural area. Each school served
an average of 354 students. Nine schools had fewer than 150 students, and two had more than
600 students. Approximately 59 percent of the students were eligible for free or reduced-price
lunch, 49 percent were classified as Hispanic, 32 percent were classified as non-Hispanic White,
and 31 percent were classified as English language learner students (California Department of
Education 2009).
With an average of 96 grade 4 or 5 students in each school, the sample size is sufficient for
detecting program impacts on student outcomes of 0.27 standard deviations for primary
academic outcomes and 0.20 standard deviations for primary social competence and behavioral
outcomes. Program impacts of this magnitude are equivalent to about two-thirds of a year of
growth experienced by grade 4 students on norm-referenced standardized tests in reading (Hill et
al. 2008).
Key outcomes and measures
Table 1 lists the study’s key outcome variables—student academic achievement, social
competence, problem behaviors, and the school environment—and their measures. These
outcomes were assessed with standardized achievement tests, teacher reports on the Social Skills
Rating System (Gresham and Elliott 1990), surveys of grade 4 and 5 students, and teacher
surveys.
•	 State English language arts assessments. Student achievement data from state-mandated
standardized assessments of English language arts (the California Standards Tests) were
collected for the years before and during program implementation. Criterion-referenced
to state standards, the California Standards Tests in English language arts are
administered to students in grades 2–11.
•	 Social Skills Rating System teacher reports. Gresham and Elliott’s (1990) Social Skills
Rating System was used to assess student social skills, problem behaviors, and academic
competence.
•	 Student surveys. A 35-minute survey assessing behaviors, attitudes, and values consistent
with the goals of character education was administered to all grade 4 and 5 students in the
fall and spring of year 1 and the spring of year 2. Using items and subscales from
validated instruments, the survey assessed student altruism (Characterplus 2002),
aggression (Orpinas and Frankowski 2001), delinquent behavior (Kisker et al. 2004), and
empathy (Funk et al. 2003), as well as school belonging and expectations (Characterplus
2002).
•	 Teacher surveys. All teachers were surveyed in the spring of year 0 before schools were
randomly assigned to the intervention or control group. Teachers were surveyed again in
the spring of years 1 and 2. The year 0 survey assessed teacher background and school
climate—teacher education, professional development experiences in language arts and
character education, activities related to social and character development that teachers
implemented in their classrooms, and school and classroom climate (students’ feelings of
belonging and school expectations). The year 1 and year 2 surveys also contained
xiii
questions that asked about other professional development that teachers participated in
during program implementation and questions that assessed teachers’ communication and
collaboration.
Table 1. Impact analysis outcomes
Outcome Measure
Academic achievement
English language arts standardized tests State assessment
Academic competence Teacher report
Social competence
Social Skills Rating System total score Teacher report
Altruism Student survey
Empathy Student survey
Problem behaviors
Externalization of problems Teacher report
Aggression Student survey
Delinquent behavior Student survey
School and classroom climate
Students’ feeling of belonging Teacher and student surveys
School expectations Teacher and student surveys
Intervention description
Developed by Dr. B. David Brooks, with support from Young People’s Press, the LIC program
is delivered by classroom teachers, with implementation support from Dr. Brooks. Through
multicultural literature (lap books) and audiocassettes, it teaches character and integrates the
language of character into the English language arts curricula. The LIC program is designed for
grades K–9 and aligned with California education standards. Teachers in schools randomly
assigned to the intervention condition participated in a one-day training session, and, in the fall
semester, received approximately two hours of coaching support for delivering the curricular
material.
The curricular material comprises two components, both designed to reinforce good character
and support language arts learning standards: the core curriculum, Lessons in Character, and the
supplementary materials, Daily Oral Language with Character and Writing with Character. The
LIC core curriculum explicitly integrates the language of character into the curriculum with a
focus on teaching for understanding that emphasizes civility, respect, responsibility,
trustworthiness, fairness, caring, loyalty, and self-control. It is a literature-based language arts
program that relies on multicultural literature, enrichment activities, cross-curricular activities,
read-aloud books, and questioning, all of which are intended to help instill habits of good
character. The core curriculum consists of 25 20-minute lessons; study teachers are asked to
implement at least 19 lessons during the academic year. It begins with a decision-making
model—Stop, Think, Act, Review (STAR)—that is used throughout the year as a classroom
management tool and reinforcement of the program lessons.
According to the developer, delivery of the LIC lesson materials does not require extensive
teacher preparation or training. Each teacher is provided with a teacher management guide that
xiv

provides concise lesson plans for each of the 25 lessons and examples of discussion questions
and classroom activities.
The supplementary materials are optional for teachers. The Daily Oral Language with Character
materials consist of sentence correction activities followed by short writing assignments that
emphasize decision-making, goal setting, civic responsibility, and other character education
components. Designed for daily use, Daily Oral Language with Character augments the regular
language arts program with lessons that take no longer than five minutes. The Writing with
Character materials (for grades 3–8) consist of 36 weekly 20-minute writing assignments that
focus on the mechanics of writing (e.g., grammar, spelling, punctuation) as well as on character
education.
Although the LIC program is a comprehensive schoolwide character education program, it is the
program’s integration into the curriculum that is intended to secure teacher support. Teachers
become program experts through daily teaching, and this acquired expertise helps build support
for comprehensive schoolwide character education policies and practices.
Analysis and results
To estimate program impacts, outcomes for students and classrooms in intervention group
schools were compared with those for students and classrooms in control group schools.
Multilevel regression models were used to estimate the effects of the LIC program and to
account for data clustering by school and classroom (Goldstein 1987; Raudenbush and Bryk
2002; Murray 1998). The impact analyses controlled for baseline (pretest) measures of outcome
variables and other student- and school-level covariates.
Implementation
The LIC core curriculum consists of 25 lessons (24 core principal lessons and one STAR lesson),
of which intervention group teachers were asked to implement 19 during the academic year.
Teachers implemented an average of 12.40 LIC lessons in year 1 and 9.56 LIC lessons in year 2.
In year 1, 16 percent of teachers reported that they did not implement any lessons, while 40
percent implemented 16 or more lessons. Teachers’ reported use of the curricular materials
declined after year 1: in year 2, 28 percent did not implement any LIC lessons, and 28 percent
implemented 16 or more lessons. The supplementary curricular materials were used less
frequently than the LIC core materials: in year 1, two-thirds of teachers used at least some of the
Daily Oral Language with Character or Writing with Character materials in their classrooms, and
in year 2, about half of teachers reported using these materials.
Estimated impacts
The primary confirmatory impact analyses indicated that grade 4 and 5 students who attended
schools in the LIC program intervention group did not exhibit higher scores on measures of
academic achievement and social competence, or lower scores on measures of problem
behaviors after two academic years of potential LIC exposure than grade 4 and 5 students who
attended schools in the control group. Moreover, the intermediate impact analyses indicated that
there were no statistically significant LIC program impacts on the school environment measures
of school expectations and student feelings of belonging. Exploratory analyses suggested that
xv
there were no statistically significant LIC program impacts on grade 4 or 5 student outcomes or
on measured school environment outcomes after the first year of program implementation.
Synopsis
The impact analyses did not find that LIC improved student academic achievement, social
competence, or problem behaviors on any of the analyzed measures. Nor were statistically
significant impacts on the school environment measures of expectations and student belonging
detected. Moreover, analyses of teacher reports of program implementation indicated that 30
percent of teachers reported that, in year 1, they implemented the number of core lessons
recommended by the developer and that, in year 2, 23 percent reported having done so. The
failure to detect program impacts on student and school environment outcomes could be due to
the weak implementation of the program, an intervention design that simply does not work in
bringing about changes in student and school environmental outcomes, or methodology
limitations of the study.
An important limitation of the study was that retention rates differed between teachers in
intervention and control schools. Although participation rates in intervention and control schools
did not differ and there were no statistically significant differences in the baseline characteristics
of teachers or students in the intervention and control schools, it is possible that there were
important unobserved differences between intervention and control samples that could have
resulted in biases in estimated program impacts. 