ABSTRACT
We present a youth development intervention program and its evaluation. Deriving from the theories of agentic self and positive youth development, we adopted a holistic perspective that focused on social agency with growth mindset and self-efficacy conceptualized as its motivators. The intervention consisted of 14 weekly sessions with 508 sixth graders in four public schools in Turkey (Mage = 11.8, 49% female). A comparable group with 417 sixth graders in five public schools served as the control group (Mage = 11.7, 47% female). All students came from families of low to middle socioeconomic status. The evaluation had an experimental design with pretest, posttest (4 months after pretest), and follow-up (11 months after posttest) assessments. Findings indicated beneficial effects of the intervention on mindset, self-efficacy, and some indicators of social agency, some of which were sustained through the follow-up. In concordance with previous research on early adolescents, a general decline in positive adaptation was observed in the control group between pre- and posttests.

Previous article
View issue table of contents
Next article
Early adolescence is characterized by changes in social, emotional, and cognitive domains. As such, this developmental period presents a potential for both opportunity and risk. Normatively, a general decline in well-being and an increase in negative emotional states and antisocial behavior have been documented in early adolescence (Wigfield, Byrnes, & Eccles, Citation2006). However, during recent decades, there has been a shift in emphasis from a problem or prevention oriented approach to a promotive or supportive approach in theoretical studies and in applied research (Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki, Taylor, & Schellinger, Citation2011; Schwartz et al., Citation2010). This shift has brought into focus the question of what characteristics constitute strengths and how those characteristics can most effectively be supported, especially for the youth who face social, economic, and family adversity. The current research presents the evaluation of one such program, which is theoretically driven, cost effective, relatively brief, and has a fully structured curriculum designed for the early adolescents in the Majority World.Footnote1

The shift in emphasis in research and policy from weaknesses to strengths in adolescent development has led to a generally agreed upon theoretical framework, namely the “positive youth development” (PYD) perspective (Lerner, von Eye, Lerner, Lewin-Bizan, & Bowers, Citation2010). The PYD framework proposes that an individual’s positive development partly constitutes its own engine. In other words, positive development in some domains (e.g., empathy) is expected to trigger positive development in other domains (e.g., attributional bias). Therefore, different domains of development must be considered as an interactive whole and not in isolation. We also adopt this holistic approach to development.

Based on Bandura’s theory of agency (Bandura, Citation2001, Citation2006), we view development of social agency as the central developmental issue in early adolescence. This approach is compatible with two other perspectives that advanced research on positive adolescent development: the PYD (Lerner, Phelps, Forman, & Bowers, Citation2009; Silbereisen & Lerner, Citation2007) and the developmental assets perspectives (Benson, Citation2007). Both of these perspectives hold that an individual’s development can reach its potential when the individual actively engages with his or her social ecology. Drawing on Bandura’s conceptualization of the agentic self (Citation2006), social agency encompasses regulatory competencies, reflective competencies, moral agency, and forethought. The development of these four domains is assumed to be interrelated. Furthermore, self-efficacy (Bandura & Locke, Citation2003) and growth mindset (Dweck, Citation2000) are introduced as two motivators of social agency. We posit reciprocal relationships between social agency and its two motivators, in accordance with our holistic approach (Figure 1).

Figure 1. The conceptual framework. Note. The concepts listed in the parentheses are the indicators used in the intervention evaluation.

Figure 1. The conceptual framework. Note. The concepts listed in the parentheses are the indicators used in the intervention evaluation.
Display full size
Much research demonstrated the cross-cultural validity of the three major constructs that are considered in this study. Social agency embodies the concept of autonomy, in that it includes autonomous regulation, autonomous alignment of behaviors with goals, and autonomous morality. The self-determination theory proposed autonomy as a basic need (Deci & Ryan, Citation2000). Cross-cultural studies confirmed the adaptive value of autonomy in a variety of cultural contexts ranging from United States and Canada, on one hand, to China, South Korea, and Turkey, on the other hand(Chirkov, Citation2007). In this sense, autonomy is expected to promote well-being because it allows the pursuit of goals that align with the values of disparate cultural contexts (Kagitcibasi, Citation2005).

The current study includes an evaluation of an intervention to support social development in early adolescence, based on this framework. It was conducted in lower-middle and low-income districts of Istanbul, Turkey, a city of nearly 14.5 million inhabitants. The evaluation had an experimental design with pre, post, and follow-up assessments. Every effort was made to render the intervention curriculum culturally sensitive. Indeed, several domains of development were emphasized because of the characteristics of the social and cultural context of this study. We elaborate on the components of this proposed framework in the following sections.

Social agency
As conceptualized by Bandura (Citation2001), agency entails the use of a host of interrelated competencies that are adaptively, continuously, and recursively mobilized. Following this conceptualization, we define social agency as the active engagement of one’s attitudes, emotions, and behaviors in order to create and maintain positive relationships. As such, social agency can support goals pertaining to the values that are deemed important in any cultural context. These values may emphasize the desirability of maintaining close interpersonal distances (such as that desired in non-Western cultural contexts) versus separateness (such as that desired in Western cultural contexts; Sorokowska, Sorokowski, Hilbert, Cantarero, & Fracko-Weak, Citation2017). Social agency encompasses four domains: (i) regulatory competencies (emotion and behavior regulation), (ii) reflective competencies (a capacity to evaluate one’s own attitudes and behaviors), (iii) moral agency (a capacity to internalize prosocial principles), and (iv) forethought (a capacity to develop a cognitive representation of outcomes of different social interactions; Bandura, Citation2001). Note that these domains coincide with many of the positive attributes often targeted by PYD and Socio-Emotional Learning (SEL) interventions (Catalano, Berglund, Ryan, Lonczak, & Hawkins, Citation2004; Lösel & Beelmann, Citation2003; Roth & Brooks-Gunn, Citation2003; Tolan, Ross, Arkin, Godine, & Clark, Citation2016).

The four domains of social agency
Regulatory competencies
These competencies refer to the capacity to regulate one’s emotions and behaviors in response to social stimuli and are identified as the predictors of subsequent positive adjustment in Anglo-American samples (e.g., Crockett, Moilanen, Raffaelli, & Randall, Citation2006; Gestsdóttir & Lerner, Citation2007; Murry, Berkel, Simons, Simons, & Gibbons, Citation2014; Schmid, Phelps, & Lerner, Citation2011; Zimmerman, Phelps, & Lerner, Citation2008), and in samples from the Majority World (Deng, Sang, & Luan, Citation2013). A recent longitudinal study showed that emotion regulation predicted subsequent psychological well-being but not vice versa (Otterpohl & Wild, Citation2015). In the current study emotion regulation and regulation of the self during social interactions (i.e., an indicator of behavior regulation) are considered.

Regulatory competencies (emotion and behavior regulation) were targets of a majority of SEL and PYD interventions to date (Catalano et al., Citation2004). Despite a normative decline in early through middle adolescence (Bowers, Gestsdottir, Geldhof, von Eye, & Lerner Citation2011; Ng-Knight et al., Citation2016), intervention evaluations demonstrated that regulatory competencies could be learned and improved in early adolescence (Claro, Boulanger, & Shaw, Citation2015; Holsen, Iversen, & Smith, Citation2009; Strohmeier, Hoffmann, Schiller, Stefanek, & Spiel, Citation2012).

The curriculum of the current intervention emphasized emotion and behavior regulation additionally because of its cultural context. Turkish culture is generally collectivistic (Kagitcibasi, Citation2007), similar to much of the Majority World. Turkish culture also has a high-power distance (66% as compared to the United States with 40%, Hofstede, Hofstede, & Minkov, Citation2010), which is associated with an acceptance of unequal distribution of power and prestige in the family, in the community, and in the society (Hofstede, 2001). Partly owing to the collectivism, and partly owing to the hierarchical nature of the society, an obedience oriented child rearing with high levels of parental behavioral and emotional control is common in Turkey (Baydar & Akcinar, Citation2015; Kagitcibasi & Ataca, Citation2005; Yağmurlu, Çıtlak, Dost, & Leyendecker, Citation2009). Much research indicates that obedience oriented parenting is associated with delays in the development of autonomous self-regulation (Otterpohl & Wild, Citation2015; Thompson & Meyer, Citation2007).

Reflective competencies
These competencies refer to one’s capacity to reflect on own attitudes, emotions, and behaviors toward others in order to evaluate the extent to which they contribute to positive relationships (Bandura, Citation2011). These evaluations are formed relative to one’s previous state, others’ competencies, and one’s aspirations Awareness of one’s social-emotional competencies is likely to interact with one’s regulatory skills in order to align behaviors with positive relationship goals (Bandura, Citation2001). This dialectic process of self-reflection and self-regulation constitutes the essence of the development of social agency. A positive self-evaluation of social skills is, therefore, likely to signal positive social development.

The curriculum of the current intervention considers three indicators of reflective competency: empathy, attributional style, and stereotyping. Empathy is the ability to understand and vicariously experience others’ emotions (Eisenberg & Fabes, Citation1990). It is regarded as an essential competency that promotes prosocial behaviors through adolescence and adulthood (Allemand, Steiger, & Fend, Citation2015; Eisenberg, Hofer, Sulik, & Liew, Citation2014). A number of studies indicated that empathy declined during early adolescence, especially for boys (e.g., Van der Graaff et al., Citation2014). Previous SEL interventions demonstrated that empathy can be learned and improved in early adolescence (Catalano et al., Citation2004).

Attributional style is a cognitive schema that is used when one attempts to understand and interpret events or behaviors. Our focus is on whether ambiguous social behaviors of others are attributed to temporary situational factors versus their dispositional (i.e., internal and/or stable) negative characteristics. Previous research linked negative dispositional attributional styles to pessimism and delays in social competence (Schwartz, Kaslow, Seeley, & Lewinsohn, Citation2000), constructs that are central to our conceptual framework. Maladaptive attributional styles increased between grades four and six (La Grange et al., Citation2008), but several recent interventions found that they could be modified during adolescence in Anglo-American samples (Wilkowski, Crowe, & Ferguson, Citation2015), and samples from the Majority World (Singh, Citation2017; Wu, Fraser, Guo, Day, & Galinsky, Citation2016).

Stereotyping is defined as a common, fixed, and oversimplified attribution of (often negative) characteristics to a person based on group affiliation. As such, it is closely associated with the dispositional attributional style, and may be detrimental to the creation of broad social networks (Poteat, Mereish, & Birkett, Citation2015). Longitudinal research found that negative stereotypes emerged after age 10, and increased through early adolescence (Hoover & Fishbein, Citation1999; Rutland, Citation1999) and slightly declined thereafter (van Zalk & Kerr, Citation2014; White et al., Citation2009). Applied studies found that interventions that emphasized the person-to-person variability of characteristics were effective (Er-Rafiy & Brauer, Citation2013; Wölfer, Schmid, Hewstone, & Zalk, Citation2016) in alleviating stereotypes.

We included these three reflective competencies as important targets of intervention because of the ethnic and religious heterogeneity of the population in Turkey, and because of the cultural context endorsing high power distance. Recent research demonstrated the causal link between social dominance orientation and high negative intergroup attitudes (Bratt, Sidanius, & Sheehy-Skeffington, Citation2016).

Moral agency
Moral agency is defined as having cognitive, attitudinal, and regulatory skills that support the self-sanctioning of behaviors that violate personal or normative moral standards (Bandura, Citation2006). Transition from childhood to adolescence is expected to bring about an increasing reliance on internalized moral principles and a decline in the reliance on authority figures for moral behavior (Eisenberg, Miller, Shell, McNalley, & Shea, Citation1991). In this study autonomous morality is considered.

Recent studies found that autonomous moral reasoning was positively associated with prosocial behaviors in early and middle adolescence (Eisenberg, Zhou, & Koller, Citation2001), and predicted subsequent prosocial behaviors and a generalized sense of well-being (Weinstein & Ryan, Citation2010). These findings supported the argument that moral agency contributes to PYD. Applied work demonstrated that educational activities and engagement in moral judgments supported the development of autonomous morality (Assor, Citation2012).

The curriculum of the current intervention emphasized autonomous morality because of the prevalence of obedience oriented parenting in Turkish culture. Obedience orientation tends to inhibit the development of autonomous moral agency (Assor, Citation2012; Roth Citation2008).

Forethought
Forethought is the capacity for anticipating likely outcomes of social interactions and choosing an effective course of action that promotes positive relationships when faced with ambiguous or problematic social situations (Bandura, Citation2001). An adolescent with effective social agency is expected to constructively resolve conflicts in the peer group rather than avoiding conflicts unless they directly involve the self. In the current study, two types of forethought are considered: positive conflict resolution and conflict avoidance.

A meta-analysis (Laursen, Finkelstein, & Betts, Citation2001) and a recent longitudinal study (Yu, Branje, Keijsers, & Meeus, Citation2014) showed that positive conflict resolution (using engagement and negotiation) increased after age 13–14. In addition, it contributed to the indicators of PYD, whereas conflict avoidance predicted poor psychological well-being in an Anglo-American sample (Ubinger, Handal, & Massura, Citation2013), as well as in a sample of Chinese adolescents (Wang et al., Citation2014). A meta-analysis of the effectiveness of interventions in promoting positive conflict resolution found an effect size of 0.30 and further noted the importance of active learning experiences in teaching of conflict management in schools (Benne & Garrard, Citation2003).

The collectivistic cultural context of the current study, and the obedience oriented parenting behaviors that are prevalent in this context, renders the consideration of forethought highly relevant. Parental conflict resolution styles were found to spillover to peer conflict resolution styles in early adolescence (Van Doorn, Branje, Vander Valk, De Goede, & Meeus, Citation2011). Furthermore, collectivistic cultures were characterized with avoidant approaches to conflict (Holt & De Vore, 2005). Taken together, these findings suggested that the participants of the current study would be especially prone to coercive or avoidant approaches to conflict, and might benefit from positive conflict management training.

Two motivators of social agency
Self-efficacy is defined as a cognition (a perception) about the self, that one’s goals that are valued or viewed as important can be attained through personal or collective action (Bandura, Citation2011). Growth mindset is defined as a set of normative beliefs that characteristics such as intelligence can be developed through effort (Dweck, Citation2006). Growth mindset is a general belief that abilities can be developed, and as such, it is likely to facilitate specific beliefs regarding one’s own capacities, that is, self-efficacy. We posit that both growth mindset and self-efficacy motivate social agency. At the same time, adaptive social agency is likely to enhance one’s evaluations of self-efficacy and growth mindset (Bandura, Citation2001). Furthermore, a positive change in self efficacy is likely to trigger a belief in positive change more generally, that is, growth mindset.

Self-efficacy
Self-efficacy involves the regulation of the self in order to align emotions, cognitions, and behaviors with the goals, provides the criteria by which to reflect on and evaluate one’s own competencies, and helps generate plans that serve one’s goals and adapt those plans as needed. In the current study, we consider both self-efficacy and goal orientation.

Self-efficacy has been identified as a personal asset (labeled “personal power,” Benson, Citation2007) and a key motivator of positive development (“agentic development,” as coined by Bandura, Citation2001; “autonomous positive development”, as coined by the PYD theory; Silbereisen & Lerner, Citation2007). This approach was validated by longitudinal empirical studies (Caraway, Tucker, Reinke, & Hall, Citation2003; Pinquart, Juang, & Silbereisen, Citation2003) and almost all PYD interventions in the United States included components that supported self-efficacy (Catalano et al., Citation2004). A major longitudinal study in the United States showed that academic self-efficacy declined through adolescence (Jacobs, Lanza, Osgood, Eccles, & Wigfield, Citation2002).

Bandura (2002) convincingly argued that self-efficacy could pertain to individual and collective goals and that it varied widely across individuals within cultures. Although self-efficacy was lower in collectivistic than in individualistic societies (Ahn, Usher, Butz, & Bong, Citation2016), its predictive value for adolescent well-being in a collectivistic cultures was recently validated (Yap & Baharudin, Citation2016). Furthermore, the association of self-efficacy with various indicators of well-being was established in the cultural context of the current study (Cikrikci & Odaci, Citation2016).

Growth mindset
Growth mindset involves the endorsement of a growth, as opposed to an entity theory of individual characteristics (Dweck & Leggett, Citation1988) and is aligned with the premise of plasticity that underlies the systems theories of human development. Indeed, it is a concept that is central to the tradition of Positive Psychology (Dweck, Citation2000). In the current study, we consider two indicators of mindset: implicit theories of intelligence and belief in effort (as an indicator of entity vs. growth beliefs in domains other than intelligence).

Previous research on positive development focused on the promising role of the belief in the malleability of attributes and possibility of positive change, construing it in terms of hope, optimism, hopeful future orientation, mastery-oriented pattern, and growth mindset (Dweck, Citation2000; Lerner, Lerner, Bowers, & Lewin-Bizan, Citation2012; Nurmi, Citation2004; Seligman, Ernst, Gillham, Reivich, & Linkins, Citation2009). Indeed, optimism regarding the future was designated as one of the personal developmental assets in previous research on positive youth development (Leffert et al., Citation1998). Growth mindset, as previously defined, was considered as a key positive characteristic, especially in lower- and lower-middle income contexts where pessimistic outlooks tended to prevail (Haimovitz & Dweck, Citation2016).

In the current intervention, we posit that mindset can facilitate the development of social agency. More specifically, mindset motivates goals, and goal directed effortful regulation (Dweck, Citation2000; Gestsdóttir, Bowers, von Eye, Napolitano, & Lerner, Citation2010; Schmid et al., Citation2011) and contributes to accurate self-reflection (e.g., an accurate evaluation of one’s failures; Romero, Master, Paunesku, Dweck, & Gross, Citation2014). It may be an especially valuable asset in the presence of negative experiences or threats to self-efficacy during times of uncertainty (Ciarrochi, Parker, Kashdan, Heaven, & Barkus, Citation2015; Martin, Nejad, Colmar, & Liem, Citation2013; Yeager, Lee, & Jamieson, Citation2016). In previous longitudinal studies of implicit theory of intelligence, it was shown that a growth mindset supported positive development via two routes: through its influence on goal setting (Blackwell, Trzesniewski, & Dweck, Citation2007; Priess-Groben & Hyde, Citation2017) and through a reduction of negative coping strategies in case of personal setbacks and frustrations (Blackwell et al., Citation2007; Butler, Citation2000; Shih, Citation2011).

Mindset can be learned through experiences of mastery, through the observation of others, and through fact based persuasion (Bandura, Citation2011). Previous intervention studies targeting mindset in cognitive and emotional domains support this expectation (Blackwell et al., Citation2007; Da Fonseca et al., Citation2008; Miu & Yeager, Citation2015; Paunesku et al., Citation2015; Yeager, Trzesniewski, Tirri, Nokelainen, & Dweck, Citation2011).

The consideration of mindset in the current study is particularly relevant because of its cultural context and prevailing socialization practices (Ilhan-Beyaztas & Dawson, Citation2017). Due to the acceptance of unequal distribution of power in all institutions of the society (previously described), children from disadvantaged backgrounds tend to be socialized to formulate goals and expectations congruent with their place in this hierarchy. This norm is likely to curtail the belief in positive change, instead nurturing beliefs that support the permanence of personal disadvantages. Recently, Haimovitz and Dweck (2016) demonstrated the link between specific socialization practices and mindset in Anglo-American children. Although growth mindset was originally conceptualized in the United States and was targeted in interventions to successfully improve educational outcomes, recently it was also targeted in an intervention for socio-economically disadvantaged children in India to improve academic skills (Chao, Visaria, Mukhopadhyay, & Dehejia, Citation2017). We propose that growth mindset is an important motivator for policies that target social mobility.

Present study
The Positive Adolescent Development Project (PERGEL)Footnote2 was a 16-month school intervention study. It was carried out in public schools in lower-middle and lower income districts of Istanbul, Turkey. An experimental evaluation with pre, post, and follow-up testing was conducted in sixth grades of nine schools that were randomly assigned to the intervention and control conditions.

The review presented in the previous section demonstrates that early adolescence is a period when normative declines are experienced in all domains of social agency. We expect to see this negative trend among the control participants. At the same time, we expect that the intervention participants will not experience the downward trend, and may even register gains in social agency. We especially expect substantial gains in growth mindset, because it is a theme that was repeated throughout the intervention curriculum, and was a relatively new topic of discussion for the participants, owing to the social and the cultural context of the current study. We also expect substantial effects on moral agency and forethought in peer interactions, given that the curriculum had an emphasis on personal responsibility in these areas. This emphasis was probably novel for the participants who were raised in an obedience oriented culture, as previously described. Owing to our holistic framework, we refrain from positing unidirectional predictive associations between mindset, self-efficacy, and social agency. Gender differences may exist in all constructs considered here, and they are accounted for in the analyses presented here. However differential effectiveness of the intervention by gender is not addressed for purposes of parsimony.

Method
Participants
The sample was composed of 925 Grade 6 students (52% male, Mage = 11.7) attending nine public schools in Istanbul, Turkey during the 2012–2013 academic year. Schools were chosen from a list provided by the Ministry of Education to be comparable to one other in terms of the socioeconomic status (SES) levels of the neighborhood that they served, the class size, and female to male ratio of the students. In Turkey, students attending public schools are registered at the school closest to their residences. Hence, in a majority of schools, the students have comparable SES levels to the community where the schools are located. In identifying a school’s SES level, we used the information provided by the Provincial Directorate of the Ministry of Education. Further information on the family SES was reported by the participants.

Out of the list of nine schools that were selected, four intervention schools were randomly chosen. One control school was relatively small, which was the reason for inclusion of an additional control school. In each school, all sixth graders were included in the study, resulting in sample sizes of 511 and 418 in the intervention and control groups, from 15 and 14 classrooms, respectively. The average class size in intervention schools was 33.9, in control schools was 29.8, F(1,27) = 4.44, p = .044.

PERGEL (positive adolescent development program)
The PERGEL Intervention program based on the conceptual framework presented in the previous section was developed and piloted over two years, between 2010 and 2012, by the authors. The intervention program was offered as a part of the regular guidance counselling curriculum. The importance of the target areas were corroborated by the guidance counselors, teachers, and administrators of the pilot schools. In order to ensure that the curriculum of the intervention was sensitive to the cultural context, we developed learning materials that used local proverbs, everyday examples, and visual materials designed specifically for this program. The curriculum had to be approved by the local authorities of the Ministry of Education. The evaluation materials were reviewed by the Institutional Review Board and the Ministry of Education.

Our program implementation was informed by the experiences of previous studies. Those experiences indicated that interventions had a high level of effectiveness if they targeted a broad range of positive attributes; if they had a well-articulated and structured curriculum that was sequenced, active, focused, and explicit; and, if they had a duration of 12 weeks or longer (Roth & Brooks-Gunn, Citation2003; Durlak et al., Citation2011).

The intervention consisted of 14 weekly sessions that were held during the second semester of the school year. Two review sessions were held, one in the middle of the training and one during the last week. A booster training of two sessions was implemented eight months after the completion of the intervention, in the beginning of the second semester of the following school year.

In line with our holistic approach, each session addressed more than one targeted construct. As the curriculum progressed, increasingly complex relationships between these constructs were addressed. For example, Session 9 on bullying addressed the following constructs: (i) mindset, that is, the potential for the perpetrator to change; (ii) self-efficacy in coping with bullying; (iii) a regulatory competency, that is, emotion regulation in the face of being victimized; (iv) two specific reflective competencies, empathy with the victims of bullying and dispositional attributions as displayed by the perpetrator; and (v) forethought, that is, the negative consequences of conflict avoidance when witnessing victimization.

Training sessions included a mixture of brief, interactive lectures, demonstrations, and group activities. A detailed manual for the trainers and workbooks for the students were prepared. Prior to the actual implementation, the curriculum, classroom materials, and student workbooks were pilot tested with a sample of 344 students in three public schools in Istanbul, which had characteristics similar to the schools that participated in the current study. Sessions were delivered during the unstructured guidance counselling periods, or periods dedicated to student club activities. Each session lasted about 40 minutes. All sessions were conducted by a team of graduate and advanced undergraduate students who were trained by the researchers. There were two trainers present in each class. The same team of trainers held all of the training sessions for each class, in order to promote rapport and familiarity with the students. The trainers met with the researchers weekly for feedback on the previous session, and for standardizing the delivery of the upcoming session.

Design of the evaluation
The intervention was evaluated with an experimental design. It consisted of a pretest (February 2013, Mage = 11.7) and a posttest (June 2013, four months after pretest, Mage = 12.1) of the 14-week training, and a follow-up assessment (May 2014, 11 months after posttest, Mage = 13.0) three months after a short booster training. The evaluation study spanned a period of 16 months. No training sessions were held in the control schools. Students in the control schools were contacted during the same periods as the intervention schools for all of the assessments.

Measures
The three target constructs of social agency, self-efficacy, and mindset were indicated by 12 outcome measures. The measures that were needed for the evaluation were not available in Turkish. Furthermore, the large number of measures that were needed in this study required the use of relatively few items for each construct. In two consecutive pilot studies with independent samples (N = 344 and N = 95) we tested the psychometric characteristics of our measures in order to select items that would yield short scales that had a unidimensional factor structure and high internal reliability (see Appendix A for the detailed description of the pilot studies). The same set of 12 measures was available for the pre, post, and follow-up assessments. For the evaluation, professional interviewers who were not affiliated with the intervention or the schools, administered paper-pencil self-reports measures in the classrooms in two consecutive class periods on the same day. A summary of the psychometric properties including the number of items, rating scales, results of factor analyses (percent variance explained by the dominant factor, and the minimum and maximum factor loadings), and Cronbach’s α ‘s of all scales for pre, post, and follow-up assessments are provided in Appendix B, Table B.1.

Indicators of social agency
Regulatory competencies
Emotion regulation
This measure was based on three subscales (difficulty engaging in goal directed behavior, impulse control difficulties, limited access to emotion regulation strategies) of Gratz and Roemer’s (Citation2004) Difficulties in Emotion Regulation scale. These scales had a total of 19 items that were rated on a 5-point Likert scale (1-not true at all to 5-very true). Based on the factor analyses of the data from the two pilot studies, the number of items was reduced to 10 that loaded to the dominant factor with acceptable loadings. A sample item was “When I am upset about something, I have difficulty thinking about anything else (reverse coded).” High scores represented adaptive emotion regulation. Cronbach α ‘s were .86, .87, and .90 for the pre, post and follow-up assessments, respectively.

Regulation in social interactions
This scale was based on the 32-item Communication Skills scale developed by Guvenc and Aktas (Citation2006) to be used with Turkish adolescents. This scale had three subscales. After the pilot studies, we used six items from the 11-item communication skills subscale that had adequate factor loadings on the dominant factor, and that assessed self-regulation in speaking and listening. A sample item was “If I know what someone is about to say, I interrupt and complete his/her sentences (reverse coded).” Similar to the original scale, a 5-point Likert scale was used, ranging from 1-not true at all to 5-very true, with high scores representing adaptive perception of self-regulation in social interactions. Cronbach α ‘s were .64, .64, and .70 for the pre, post, and follow-up assessments, respectively.

Reflective competencies
Empathy
The Turkish adaptation of Jolliffe and Farrington’s (Citation2006) Basic Empathy Scale was used (adaptation by Topcu & Erdur-Baker, Citation2010). The original scale of 20 items with a 5-point Likert scale was composed of emotional and cognitive subscales. However, this factor structure could not be replicated in our pilot studies. Furthermore, the 5-point Likert responses were highly skewed yielding a scale score with a limited variance. In order to address this problem, we revised the items to a structured alternatives format as suggested by Harter (Citation1985) for young respondents. This format presented each item as two opposing self-descriptions such as “I have trouble figuring out when my friends are happy” versus “I can easily figure out when my friends are happy.” Using a 7-point scale in between these opposing descriptions, the respondents were asked to indicate a point that best described their perceptions of themselves. High scores represented the perception of one’s own evaluation of themselves of their capacity for empathy. Cronbach α ‘s in this study were .75, .82, and .82 for the pre, post, and follow-up assessments, respectively.

The structured alternatives format has three advantages. First, it allows a clearer emphasis on personal experiences rather than normative expectations. Second, it only requires anchoring of the two ends of the response scale, allowing the use of a 7-point rating scale for these items, remedying the problems of limited variance and skewed scale scores. Third, this format has a low susceptibility to social desirability (Harter, Citation1985).

Avoidance of stereotyping
The 12-item Individual Differences in the Acceptance of Stereotyping Scale (Carter, Hall, Carney, & Rosip, Citation2006) was adapted for the current study through translation and back translation, and pilot testing. Based on the factor analyses of the pilot data, the number of items was reduced to five that loaded on the dominant factor with acceptable loadings. A sample item was “People differ so much from one another, it is impossible to generalize about them.” A 5-point Likert scale was used, instead of the original 6-point scale, in order to align the answer options to other measures with Likert scales. High scores represented strong avoidance of stereotyping. Cronbach α ‘s were .61, .65, and .69 for the pre, post, and follow-up assessments, respectively.

Dispositional attributions
For pilot testing, we used 6 items from the 18-item Adolescents’ Attributional Style Questionnaire (Rodriguez-Naranjo & Cano, Citation2010) and 12 items from the 34-item Children’s Belief in Their Own Control scale (Crandall, Katkovsky, & Crandall, Citation1965) that assessed the respondents’ likelihood of making (negative) dispositional attributions. However, the analyses of the first pilot data indicated extremely poor psychometric properties of these items. For the second pilot, we adopted the approach used by the Children’s Attributional Style measure by Seligman et al. (Citation1984). This latter measure consisted of a set of scenarios that described real life situations. The respondents were presented with two possible causes that differed in their attributional style and were asked to indicate which cause best reflected the way they would have thought.

Similar to Seligman et al. (Citation1984), we pilot tested 18 scenarios from which we chose 12 for inclusion in the evaluation study. Each scenario described a hypothetical event that could happen to a peer, for example, “A student greeted his/her friend but was not greeted back.” The opposing causes that were presented for this scenario were “because the friend did not see him/her” (situational attribution) and “because the friend is a rude person” (dispositional attribution). The participants were asked to indicate which of the two opposing causes was more probable on a 7-point structured alternatives format. High scores represented a tendency toward dispositional attributions. Cronbach α ‘s were .70, .69, and .76 for the pre, post, and follow-up assessments, respectively.

Moral agency
Autonomous morality
This measure was adapted by Secer, Cagdas, and Secer (Citation2006) for Turkish respondents based on the Rule Understanding Interview for Children in the School Context by Buchanan-Burrow and Barret (Citation1998). The original scale presented six scenarios that described rule braking by peers. These scenarios were accompanied by the description of situations, each containing a modification of the original scenario that had the potential to change its moral evaluation. The respondents were asked to indicate whether that modification rendered the situation acceptable. In order to measure autonomous morality, we used the modification that represented internalized principles for observing rules. For example, one of the scenarios was: “Although it is forbidden to take someone else’s belongings without their knowledge at school, Cindy takes a book from Linda’s bag without letting her know, and puts it into her own bag.” One of the presented modifications was: “If Cindy’s teacher tells her that she can take a book from Linda’s bag, will it be OK for Cindy to do so?” An answer of “No” indicated autonomous (internalized) morality. After the pilot, five of the six scenarios were retained in the evaluation study. Cronbach α ‘s were .73, .79, and .80 at pre, post, and follow-up assessments, respectively.

Forethought
Positive conflict tactics and conflict avoidance
We used an adaptation of Koruklu’s (1998) 12-item Conflict Resolution Scale that was developed for Turkish children. Each item of this scale described a possible response to a peer conflict situation. The respondent rated the degree to which this response was representative of his or her own behavior on a 5-point scale. The first pilot study showed that this scale had unsatisfactory psychometric properties in early adolescents. We therefore used the same set of twelve peer conflict situations and revised the structure of the scale in order measure both positive conflict tactics and conflict avoidance. Specifically, we revised the responses to each situation to reflect a behavior that represented a positive approach to peer conflict, and a behavior that represents conflict avoidance. After the second pilot study, we reduced the number of scenarios to seven that yielded a single factor each, to represent the two components of forethought (positive conflict tactics and conflict avoidance). A sample item was “If a friend who I like calls me ‘stupid’ when I am with another friend:” (1) “when we are alone, I will ask why she/he spoke to me that way, and I will let her/him know that I was upset about it “(positive conflict tactic); (2) “I will not talk to her/him about this” (conflict avoidance). Each of these behaviors was rated on a scale of 1, not likely at all, to 5, very likely. Cronbach α ‘s were .80, .83, and .84 for positive conflict resolution; and, .62, .69, and .73 for conflict avoidance, at pre, post, and follow-up assessments, respectively.

Indicators of self-efficacy
Self-efficacy
The Turkish adaptation of Sherer et al. (Citation1982) self-efficacy scale was used (adaptation by Gozum & Aksayan, Citation1999). Thirteen items of this scale that were applicable to this age group were reduced to 10 items following the psychometric analyses of the pilot data. A sample item was “I find in myself, the will to strive and persevere, no matter what.” A 5-point Likert scale was used, ranging from 1–not true at all to 5–very true, with high scores representing high self-efficacy. Cronbach α ‘s were .80, .81, and .80 for the pre, post, and follow-up assessments, respectively.

Goal orientation
Goal orientation was assessed using an adaptation of Lockwood, Jordan, and Kunda’s (Citation2002) General Regulatory Focus measure. A 10-item short version of this originally 18-item scale was developed by El Samen (Citation2011). Based on the factor analyses of the pilot data, the number of items was reduced to six that loaded on the dominant factor that represented a promotion orientation. A sample item was “I frequently imagine how I will achieve my hopes and aspirations.” High scores indicated a strong promotion orientation. Cronbach α ‘s were .61, .71, and .73 for the pre, post, and follow-up assessments, respectively.

Indicators of mindset
Implicit theories of intelligence
Dweck’s (2000) implicit theory of intelligence scale was used. Based on the factor analyses of the pilot data, we used five items that loaded on the dominant factor. A sample item was “Intelligence is something about a person that he/she can’t change very much. (Reverse coded).” A 5-point Likert scale was used, instead of the original 6-point scale, in order to align the answer options to other measures of this study with Likert scales. High scale scores represented a growth mindset. Cronbach α ‘s in the present study were .63, .76, and .77 for the pre, post, and follow-up assessments, respectively.

Belief in effort
We developed a short four-item scale that measured the respondents’ belief that with effort, one can achieve goals in any domain. The respondents were presented with four hypothetical scenarios (e.g., “Let’s say, you cannot do a movement in PE class that other students can”), each followed by two opposing statements at the opposite ends of a 7-point structured alternatives format (e.g., “because I am naturally not talented in this”, versus “because I have not practiced that move previously”). High scores represented belief in effort or a growth mindset. Cronbach α ‘s in this study were modest, partly because of the limited number of items; .55, .65, and .59 for the pre, post, and follow-up assessments, respectively.

Socioeconomic status (SES)
The participants reported on three indicators of family socioeconomic status: maternal education, paternal education, and a composite measure of family’s economic well-being. Economic well-being was measured on the basis of information on the material possessions of the family (e.g., a car, a dishwasher, a computer), financial status of the family (having a credit card), and the characteristics of the home (e.g., heating system, having an internet connection at home, the number of rooms), which could be accurately reported by the participants. A factor score was calculated with these indicators. This approach to measurement could rank the respondents with respect to their SES, but could not assign them an absolute value (M = 0, SD = 1). Based on self-reports, 43.5% of the participants’ families did not have a credit card, 33.0% did not have a computer at home, 40.9% did not have internet access, and 57.0% did not own a car.

Data analysis
The analyses consisted of the comparison of the preintervention characteristics of the intervention and control participants; the comparison of the preintervention characteristics of the participants by their attrition status; and, the estimation of the differences in the pre-, post-, and follow-up trajectories of the intervention and control participants using the 12 indicators previously presented.

We tested the differences in the preintervention characteristics of the participants in the intervention and control conditions using F-tests with a critical value determined by the Bonferroni correction (p = 0.0085). We conducted similar F-tests of the differences of the three attrition status groups (remained in the study, attrited at posttest, attrited at follow-up).

The intervention effects could not be estimated using the traditional within-and-between-subjects ANOVA because of two reasons. First, the data were collected from students who were clustered in classrooms and schools. The students from each classroom received the intervention curriculum together and from a single team of trainers. Given the interactive and participatory nature of the curriculum, it was likely that the effects of the intervention would be correlated within a class. Second, there was a moderate loss of subjects by the time of follow-up, and limiting the analyses to those who were present at all three assessments would potentially bias the findings. We therefore estimated a linear mixed-effects model (McCulloch & Searle, Citation2000) using SPSS 24.0. This model accounted for the participant and class level SES, and the participants’ gender, accounted for the within-class homogeneity of the observations, and allowed an unequal number of repeated assessments.

Results
In order to establish the comparability of the participants in the intervention and control conditions, their mean scores on 12 indicators of the three target constructs at pretest (mindset, self-efficacy, and social agency; see Figure 1), as well as their gender composition and SES were compared. The two groups only differed on self-efficacy, control participants having a higher self-efficacy than the intervention participants, F(1, 868) = 10.74, p = .001. This difference persisted even when the SES of the participants was controlled.

A total of 925 sixth grade students participated in the pretest. Among those, 87.2% (N = 807) participated in the posttest. Among the students present in both pretest and posttest, 67.2% (N = 542) participated in the follow-up assessments. Much of this attrition was due to the changes in the schools of the students because of residential moves or re-assignments of the students to other schools in the same district by the district administration. These reassignments were independent of the student characteristics. There was significantly more attrition from the control than the intervention schools between the pretest and the posttest (18.9% vs. 7.7%, χ2(1) = 26.13, p = .00). The attrition rates from the intervention and control conditions was similar between the posttest and the follow up (37.0% vs. 29.9%, χ2(1) = 4.53, p = .03).

We defined three groups of students: those who participated in pretest, posttest, and follow-up, those who participated in pretest and posttest only, and those who participated in the pretest only. These three groups significantly differed only in SES and no other characteristic. The SES differences in attrition were limited to the attrition between the pretest and the posttest. The participants who attrited had significantly lower SES than those who remained in the study, F(2,922) = 47.99, p = .00.

Normative trends for the control participants
A table of descriptive statistics of all 12 indicators is given in Appendix B, Table B.2. The results of the mixed models accounting for the within-classroom homogeneity of the participants, SES at class and individual levels, and participant gender are presented in Table 1. The estimated means of each measure at pretest, posttest, and follow-up for the control condition (data columns 4–6) highlighted a prevailing normative decline in social agency indicators, self-efficacy, and mindset during the sixth and seventh grades.

Table 1. Results of the mixed models of intervention effectiveness.
Download CSVDisplay Table
In the control group, emotion regulation, empathy, autonomous morality, and positive conflict tactics; both indicators of self-efficacy; and, both indicators of mindset significantly declined between the pretest and the posttest (p < .05, Bonferroni corrected), and conflict avoidance significantly increased during that time. Between the posttest and the follow-up (i.e., the end of the sixth grade and the end of the seventh grade), some of the indicators signaled spontaneous recovery, while others continued to decline in the control group. At follow-up, empathy, positive conflict tactics, and belief in effort recovered to the pretest levels. Emotion regulation and self-efficacy declined through the follow-up. The remaining indicators did not change significantly between the posttest and the follow-up.

The intervention effectiveness results for each of the domains considered in the conceptual model (see Table 1) are summarized in the following sections.

Intervention effectiveness for social agency
The effectiveness of the intervention for different domains of social agency was not similar. The effectiveness was highest for moral agency and lowest for the regulatory competencies.

The intervention was not effective in altering the downward trend in emotion regulation; however, it was effective for the regulation of social interactions. This latter outcome did not change significantly between the pretest and the posttest for the control group, while it increased for the intervention group. Furthermore, these gains were maintained through the follow-up (Figure 2a and b). The empathy scores of both the control and the intervention participants declined temporarily during the period between the pretest and the posttest, with a recovery by the follow-up (see the comparisons of the estimated means, Table 1). However, both the decline and the recovery was significantly less pronounced for the intervention participants (Figure 2c).

Figure 2. The estimated means of the indicators of social agency for the control and intervention conditions. Note. These estimates were based on a multilevel model that accounted for within-class homogeneity of the observations and allowed an unequal number of repeated assessments across observations that could arise due to attrition. The model additionally controlled for the participant and class level SES, and the participants’ gender.

Figure 2. The estimated means of the indicators of social agency for the control and intervention conditions. Note. These estimates were based on a multilevel model that accounted for within-class homogeneity of the observations and allowed an unequal number of repeated assessments across observations that could arise due to attrition. The model additionally controlled for the participant and class level SES, and the participants’ gender.
Display full size
For both the control and the intervention participants, avoidance of stereotyping improved between the pretest and the follow-up (Table 1). The intervention participants achieved a significant improvement by the posttest, but the control participants achieved it a year later, by the follow-up (Figure 2d). Although the F statistic testing the time × intervention condition effect was nonsignificant for dispositional attributions, the intervention participants’ experienced a significant decline during the study period, while the comparable decline for the control participants was non-significant (Figure 2e).

The control participants exhibited a substantial decline in autonomous morality between pretest and posttest (Table 1). Despite lower scores on autonomous morality at pretest, the intervention participants had significantly higher scores on this measure than the control participants at both posttest and follow up, largely due to the maintenance of the pretest levels of autonomous morality (Figure 2f).

Positive conflict tactics scores of the control participants significantly declined between the pretest and the posttest, while the intervention participants maintained the pretest levels throughout the study period, resulting in a significant F test of the between-group difference in the trends (Table 1 and Figure 2g). Conflict avoidance increased for the control condition while it was maintained at the pretest level for the intervention condition, resulting in a significantly lower level of conflict avoidance at posttest by the latter group (Table 1 and Figure 2h).

Intervention effectiveness for self-efficacy and mindset
The control group experienced declines in self-efficacy throughout the study period, while the intervention group (despite significantly lower self-efficacy at pretest) maintained their pretest level. Similarly, the mean levels of goal orientation in the intervention group were maintained between the pretest and the follow-up (Figure 3).

Figure 3. The estimated means of the indicators of self-efficacy for the control and intervention conditions. Note. These estimates were based on a multilevel model that accounted for within-class homogeneity of the observations and allowed an unequal number of repeated assessments across observations that could arise due to attrition. The model additionally controlled for the participant and class level SES, and the participants’ gender.

Figure 3. The estimated means of the indicators of self-efficacy for the control and intervention conditions. Note. These estimates were based on a multilevel model that accounted for within-class homogeneity of the observations and allowed an unequal number of repeated assessments across observations that could arise due to attrition. The model additionally controlled for the participant and class level SES, and the participants’ gender.
Display full size
The trends in the two indicators of mindset (implicit theories of intelligence, and belief in effort) pointed to their stability for the intervention condition, as opposed to a decline in the control condition (Figure 4). The participants in the two conditions had similar scores for implicit theories of intelligence at pretest, but their differences at posttest and follow-up were significant. Between the pretest and the posttest, the control participants’ scores in belief in effort declined while the intervention participants’ scores remained stable. This beneficial trend, however, could not be maintained at the follow-up.

Figure 4. The estimated means of the indicators of mindset for the control and intervention conditions. Note. These estimates were based on a multilevel model that accounted for within-class homogeneity of the observations and allowed an unequal number of repeated assessments across observations that could arise due to attrition. The model additionally controlled for the participant and class level SES, and the participants’ gender.

Figure 4. The estimated means of the indicators of mindset for the control and intervention conditions. Note. These estimates were based on a multilevel model that accounted for within-class homogeneity of the observations and allowed an unequal number of repeated assessments across observations that could arise due to attrition. The model additionally controlled for the participant and class level SES, and the participants’ gender.
Display full size
Effect sizes
The last two columns of Table 1 provide the effect size estimates for the pretest-to-posttest change and for the pretest-to-follow-up change for each of the twelve indicators. The pretest-to-posttest effect sizes ranged from Cohen’s d = 0.11 to 0.55. The largest short term effect size was for the implicit theories of intelligence. This was followed by autonomous morality, positive conflict resolution tactics, and goal orientation. For the long term, the largest effect size was again for the implicit theories of intelligence, followed by self-efficacy and autonomous morality. Note that the effect size for self-efficacy increased from posttest to follow up. The most problematic result pertained to empathy, with a negative long term Cohen’s d due to the strong recovery of empathy to the pretest level in the control condition, but not the intervention condition.

Discussion
The current research presented a positive youth development intervention and its evaluation for early adolescents in a non-Western culture. Early adolescence was targeted because it tends to be a period when a general decline in well-being occurs. Indeed, similar to previous research (e.g., Multisite Violence Prevention Project, Citation2013; Scales et al., Citation2016), our findings indicated such a decline for the control group participants during the sixth grade in nine of the twelve indicators considered in this study. Only three of these indicators recovered to the sixth grade levels by the end of the seventh grade (follow-up). These findings reaffirm the need for evidence based interventions that could halt or reverse this trend especially in adverse socioeconomic conditions such as those experienced by the youth of the Majority World.

Intervention effectiveness for social agency
The intervention had mixed effects on the four domains of social agency. The largest sustained effects were on the indicator of moral agency (autonomous morality) and one of the two indicators of regulatory competencies (the regulation in social interactions), as indicated by the estimated Cohen’s d that accounted for the clustering of the observations as well as SES and gender. Intervention had substantial effects on the indicators of forethought but these effects were not sustained through the follow-up. The effects of the intervention on the indicators of reflective competencies were mixed with no evidence of sustained effects.

Among the regulatory competencies, emotional regulation and regulation in social interactions were assessed. The intervention could not stop the decline in emotion regulation (as indicated by the results of the linear mixed model). It is possible that the physiologically driven rise in emotional reactivity in early adolescence (Bowers et al., Citation2011) cannot be reversed with a short universal school-based intervention. However, the intervention participants registered gains in the regulation of their behavior when interacting with others. These findings suggest that young adolescents can regulate the outward expression of their emotions, which may be more important for peer and adult relationships than emotion regulation. They also suggest that behavior regulation may be easier to teach and learn than emotion regulation.

The results for the three indicators of reflective competencies were mixed. The only problematic finding in this evaluation study was for empathy (Cohen’s d for pretest-to-follow-up change). Two factors may have contributed to the negative effect of the intervention at the time of the follow-up. First, the mean empathy measure was quite high (only 1SD below the maximum possible score) at pretest for both the intervention and the control participants, suggesting that a ceiling effect may have played a role. Second, the study was conducted in a collectivistic culture with high levels of relatedness. It is likely that the adolescents have been socialized for having high levels of empathy for the in-group members (Brewer & Yuki, Citation2007). Intervention, therefore, may add minimally to the development of empathy. There was a significant gain in avoidance of stereotyping by the intervention participants, and this positive trend persisted through the follow-up. Although the overall effect of the intervention on dispositional attributions was nonsignificant, the intervention participants registered significant declines in this measure through the follow-up.

The PERGEL intervention was effective in halting normative declines in the indicators of moral agency and forethought. Most importantly, the loss of autonomous moral reasoning seen in the control group was not experienced by the intervention group. The intervention effectiveness on positive conflict resolution (Cohen’s d = .31) was almost identical to that reported by a meta-analysis of interventions targeting this competency (Benne & Garrard, Citation2003). Gains in autonomous morality combined with the gains in positive conflict tactics and reductions in conflict avoidance suggest that PERGEL participants may not only have achieved higher positive social agency than their peers in the control condition, but they may also be poised to contribute to the positive functioning of their peer networks.

We explored the possible reasons for the limited effectiveness of the intervention on the regulatory and reflective competencies as compared to the average pre-post effect sizes for SEL skills reported in two meta-analyses (Durlak et al., Citation2011; Payton et al., Citation2008). One such reason might be that the program was implemented only in the sixth grades but not the whole school. The school climate could not be altered and the participants, who were the youngest group of students in their middle schools, were exposed to peer networks that had not had an exposure to the principles of positive social agency. This limitation can be overcome if the intervention becomes integrated into the regular curriculum, as intended. Indeed, whole-school SEL interventions in the United States achieved effect sizes that were twice that of the current intervention (Durlak et al., Citation2011; Payton et al., Citation2008) and a positive school climate was found to increase the effectiveness of universal interventions (Dymnicki & The Multisite Violence Prevention Project, Citation2013).

Another reason of modest effectiveness of the intervention on regulatory and reflective competencies may be the likely inconsistency of the teachings of our intervention with those of the participants’ families. Family socialization is largely internalized by late childhood. The principles of family socialization in the current cultural context may be guided by (i) conservative patriarchal values; (ii) norms of interpersonal relationships that support a hierarchy based on gender, age, and status; and (iii) high levels of ingroup relatedness accompanied by a suspicion of outgroups (Kagitcibasi, Citation1982, Citation2007). These values may have been at odds with the egalitarian and humanitarian values endorsed by our intervention where the participants are encouraged to be aware of and regulate their implicit attributions, to use perspective taking, and to build broad peer networks regardless of the group membership of their peers. Given this discrepancy, the limited effectiveness of this short school-based program on regulatory and reflective competencies is not surprising. We further discuss this issue of cultural compatibility in the Contributions of Our Approach section.

Intervention effectiveness for the two motivators of social agency
Self-efficacy and mindset have been targeted by many PYD interventions, and their development may be particularly valuable in the social and cultural context of the current study. The intervention was effective in supporting a growth mindset and self-efficacy (i.e., the implicit theories of intelligence, belief in effort, self-efficacy, and goal orientation) at posttest, with an average effect size (Cohen’s d) of 0.33. Most of these gains were retained at follow-up, except for the belief in effort. The strong effect of the PERGEL program on implicit theories of intelligence shows that this cognitive schema can be changed when backed with arguments that are evidenced and presented in a culturally sensitive curriculum even when the normative developmental trend is an increasing endorsement of entity theories. This finding reaffirms the premise of recent research recognizing the role of belief in positive change and hope (Lerner, Lerner, Urban, & Zaff, Citation2016) not only as components of positive adolescent development, but as a “foundational strength” at its core (Lerner et al., Citation2012; Nurmi, Citation2004).

Contributions of our approach
The main contributions of this study are its theoretically grounded holistic view of positive development; its focus on social agency; the inclusion of the growth mindset in an intervention that supported social development; and the cultural relevance of our framework. The development of the domains of social agency and its two motivators are inherently interrelated and can neither be conceptualized nor be supported in isolation. For example, regulatory competencies may help reduce negative cognitions such as one’s implicit and negative evaluations of social stimuli (e.g., stereotypical and dispositional attributions). At the same time, stereotypical and dispositional attributions are unlikely to coexist with a growth mindset. Accurate and empathetical evaluations of social stimuli, combined with a regulatory capacity can generate adaptive forethought.

Concepts that are akin to mindset (such as hope) have been targeted in recent PYD interventions (Lerner et al., Citation2014). However, the concept of growth mindset is distinct from the concept of hope, in that it refers to a generalized attitude that anyone can experience a positive change. This definition is aligned with the premise of plasticity that underlies systems theories of human development.

In Western and individualistic cultures, individual achievement and individual potential are emphasized, and their pursuit is expected. However, in other cultural contexts (as well as in challenging social environments), the recognition and the acceptance of social hierarchy constitutes an important aspect of socialization (Oettingen, Citation1995). In those contexts, which may generate hopelessness and frustration (Chao, Visaria, Mukhopadhyay, & Dehejia, Citation2017), supporting the development of mindset, self-efficacy, and social agency may be especially important. High power distance is likely to negatively influence the mindset, and self-efficacy while encouraging heteronomous morality (Ciarrochi et al., Citation2015). Obedience oriented child rearing is likely to inhibit the development of self-efficacy, self-regulation, and autonomous moral reasoning. Collectivistic values are likely to promote conflict avoidance, and a lack of empathy and attributional biases toward outgroups (Brewer & Yuki, Citation2007). A combination of these cultural attributes may not only result in the delayed development of social agency, but also detriment positive intergroup relations (Sorensen & Oyserman, Citation2009).

We propose that the nurturing of social agency, self-efficacy, and growth mindset is important in all cultural contexts, including the social and cultural contexts characterized by a rapid change from an agricultural to an industrial society. The global economic and social changes have happened at a rate that exceeded cultural change (Kagitcibasi & Cemalcilar, Citation2018), resulting in disharmony between adaptive behaviors and some values, norms, and socialization practices. For example, obedience oriented child rearing practices may have been adaptive in rural societies, but not in industrial societies. The young adolescents of today will, in the future, work in competitive global economies. In that role, they will require a growth mindset, self-efficacy, and social agency, which may be associated with a level of autonomy that was not traditionally valued by rural societies (Kagitcibasi, Citation2007). Nevertheless, such autonomy has not been found to conflict with emotional interdependence that is valued in the collectivistic cultures of the Majority World (Chirkov, Citation2007; Kagitcibasi, Citation2007). Indeed, the family change model of Kagitcibasi (Citation1990) demonstrated precisely this point: autonomy, as a basic need, does not negate a high level of relatedness. The young adolescent students, who develop their social agency today, are likely to be the parents and teachers of tomorrow, raising children who have social agency, but at the same time, endorse close relationships with their families and communities.

Limitations of the current study
Our conceptual framework adopts a systems perspective and has its roots in the more general theory of the agentic self (Bandura, Citation2006) and the concept of growth mindset that was originally defined in the tradition of positive psychology (Dweck, Citation2006). Its formulation and implications await further empirical validation in a variety of social and cultural contexts, in basic and in applied research. For example, the cascading development of the mindset, self-efficacy, and social agency must be tested in samples of varying ages and cultural backgrounds.

In addition, five limitations of this study must be noted. First, the PERGEL curriculum was limited to one meeting a week for one school term, with a short booster in the second year. Most probably, further gains would have accrued if it were more intensive and extensive. In addition, the effectiveness of the intervention at the follow-up could partly be attributed to the booster in the second year. Second, attrition between the posttest and the follow-up was moderate, mostly due to school changes of the students. Attrition disproportionately removed the low SES students from observation, and this might have resulted in a stronger representation of relatively advantaged participants at the follow-up. Third, the program might have been more effective if the teachers were exposed to the principles of the program (Durlak et al., Citation2011). This could have promoted their use of the concepts that were targeted in the intervention curriculum in a variety of situations at school. Our observations suggested that some of the teachers might not have been positive socialization agents on issues such as conflict resolution, stereotyping, goal orientation, or autonomous morality. Fourth, our intervention was not a whole school intervention, and as such, could not alter the school climate. Nevertheless, the participants were with their peers, being exposed to the same intervention curriculum, so they could develop their social agency as a group. Finally, the long term benefits of the program beyond 16 months were not tested.

Notwithstanding the aforementioned limitations, the present study is promising in showing that social agency can be supported in school contexts in early adolescence. A significant policy implication of this study is that a program supporting positive social agency can beneficially be integrated into the regular middle school curriculum in the Majority World. Such programs may pave the way toward building peaceful societies in the twenty-first century by helping youth to recognize that every individual has a positive potential, that conflicts can be resolved without aggression, that one is responsible for their own moral behavior and that they can positively contribute to the functioning of their social networks through their agency.