BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Many urban youth experiencesignificant and unremitting negative abstract
stressors, including those associated with community violence, multigenerational poverty,
failing educational systems, substance use, limited avenues for success, health risks, and
trauma. Mindfulness instruction improves psychological functioning in a variety of adult
populations; research on mindfulness for youth is promising, but has been conducted
in limited populations. Informed by implementation science, we evaluated an adapted
mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) program to ameliorate the negative effects of
stress and trauma among low-income, minority, middle school public school students.
METHODS: Participants were students at two Baltimore City Public Schools who were
randomly assigned by grade to receive adapted MBSR or health education (Healthy Topics
[HT]) programs. Self-report survey data were collected at baseline and postprogram.
Deidentified data were analyzed in the aggregate, comparing MBSR and HT classes, by
using regression modeling.
RESULTS: Three hundred fifth- to eighth-grade students (mean 12.0 years) were in MBSR
and HT classes and provided survey data. Participants were 50.7% female, 99.7% African
American, and 99% eligible for free lunch. The groups were comparable at baseline.
Postprogram, MBSR students had significantly lower levels of somatization, depression,
negative affect, negative coping, rumination, self-hostility, and posttraumatic symptom
severity (all Ps < .05) than HT.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support the hypothesis that mindfulness instruction improves
psychological functioning and may ameliorate the negative effects of stress and reduce
trauma-associated symptoms among vulnerable urban middle school students. Additional
research is needed to explore psychological, social, and behavioral outcomes, and
mechanisms of mindfulness instruction.
 aDivision of General Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, and bAll Children’s Hospital Johns Hopkins Medicine, Saint Petersburg, Florida
Dr Sibinga conceptualized, designed, and oversaw study procedures, including data collection,
analysis, and interpretation, and drafted and revised the manuscript; Ms Webb assisted with
and coordinated data collection, conducted data analysis, and contributed to the manuscript;
Dr Ghazarian contributed to the study design and data collection procedures, conducted data
analysis and interpretation, and revised the manuscript; Dr Ellen contributed substantively
to the study design and procedures and to data interpretation and reviewed and revised the
manuscript; and all authors approved the fi nal manuscript as submitted.
This trial has been registered at www. clinicaltrials. gov (identifi er NCT02493218).
DOI: 10.1542/peds.2015-2532
Accepted for publication Sep 30, 2015
 Address correspondence to Erica M.S. Sibinga, MD, MHS, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Center for Child and Community Health Research, Suite 4200, Mason F. Lord Building, Center
Tower, 5200 Eastern Ave, Baltimore, MD 21224. E-mail: esibinga@jhmi.edu
To cite: Sibinga EM, Webb L, Ghazarian SR, et al. SchoolBased Mindfulness Instruction: An RCT. Pediatrics.
2016;137(1):e20152532
WHAT’S KNOWN ON THIS SUBJECT: Many urban youth
experience signifi cant negative stressors. Mindfulness
instruction reduces stress and improves psychological
functioning in adults. Research in youth is promising but has
been conducted in limited populations. Little is known about
mindfulness instruction for low-income minority students.
WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS: In this randomized activecontrolled trial, school-based mindfulness instruction led
to improved psychological functioning and lower levels of
posttraumatic stress symptoms. High-quality mindfulness
instruction merits consideration as primary prevention
for mental and behavioral health problems in low-income,
minority urban students.
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/137/1/e20152532/1062622/peds_20152532.pdf
byUniversityLibraryUtrechtuser
 SIBINGA et al
Recent violence in Baltimore City
has drawn attention to the acute
and chronic problems experienced
by many of the city’s poor and
minority residents. Due to effects
of multigenerational poverty,
limited educational and economic
opportunities, high levels of drug
use and trade, and pervasive
community violence, urban youth
in Baltimore and many US cities are
at increased risk for exposure to a
variety of stresses, including early
life stress, recurrent and chronic
stress, and exposure to significant
and/or recurrent traumas. As an
example, it is estimated that 50% to
96% of urban youth directly witness
violence within their community.1
The significant, recurrent, and
chronic nature of these stressors
may overwhelm the capacity to cope
acutely and chronically,2 which is
required for healthy development
and positive trajectories. Any or all of
these forms of stress may contribute
to the state of toxic stress in which
an individual’s ability to manage or
cope with stress is overwhelmed on
an ongoing basis. Pediatricians have
been called to action to understand
the complex and intertwined systems
that are disrupted by stress,3 as well
as to recognize that effective health
approaches to mitigate the negative
effects of toxic stress and trauma
may be interventions that occur in
the community, not only in medical
settings.4
In response to the pervasive
exposure to stress and trauma, we
have developed and previously
tested a program of mindfulness
instruction intended to reduce the
negative impacts of stress and toxic
stress among urban youth. Based
on Jon Kabat-Zinn’s well-studied
mindfulness-based stress reduction
(MBSR) program for adults,5,6
we had previously adapted and
evaluated the MBSR program for
use with urban youth in clinic7–9 and
school settings.10 In particular, we
conducted a randomized controlled
trial (RCT) of our school-based
12-week MBSR program compared
with a 12-week active control (health
education) program at a small
middle school for city-dwelling boys.
Compared with the active control
program, MBSR participants had
significantly less anxiety, improved
coping, and borderline attenuation
of the salivary cortisol increase
associated with the academic term.10
We were interested in expanding
the program to urban public schools
with significant need. Through
collaboration with Elev8 Baltimore,
a nonprofit organization aimed at
optimizing linkage and utilization of
school-based activities for the benefit
of students and their families, we
found the complementary elements
for implementation. Elev8 Baltimore
had experience with and presence in
the schools and understood firsthand
the high level of students’ exposure
to trauma and toxic stress.
Implementation science has
elucidated a number of essential
considerations for program
expansion. The consolidated
framework for implementation
research articulates the importance
of the following elements: evidencebased intervention, the outer setting,
the inner setting, the individuals
involved, and the process.11,12
Attending to these elements of
implementation and in collaboration
with Elev8 Baltimore, we used the
evidence-based MBSR program
with two Elev8 Baltimore schools
in which we could ensure high
potential for student benefit, sitespecific awareness of school culture,
school administration buy-in, highquality program instruction, highquality program implementation
staff, community partnership,
infrastructure to support ongoing
collaboration with school and Elev8
Baltimore, and structure and process
for evaluation of implementation and
program effect.
METHODS
Participants and Study Design
Students were eligible to participate
in the study if they attended fifth
through eighth grades, including
special education, in either of two
Elev8 Baltimore schools selected
for this trial, during the 2012–2013
academic year. Conceptualized and
presented as two complementary
programs focused on overall
student wellness, Healthy Topics
(HT) and MBSR were incorporated
into the school curriculum and
delivered to all students during the
“resource” class time for a portion
of the school year, instead of classes
such as advisory, art, or music.
Students were randomly assigned
by school and grade into either the
intervention program or the active
control program; thus, each school
had both programs. Blinding to
group assignment occurred at the
data management, analysis, and
interpretation levels. The study
was approved by the Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine Institutional
Review Board.
Intervention Program
Our 12-week program is adapted
from MBSR, a structured 8-week
program of instruction in the
cultivation of mindfulness, a practice
of purposeful nonjudgmental
attention to the happenings of the
present moment.5 MBSR programs
consist of 3 components: (1) didactic
material related to mindfulness,
meditation, yoga, and the mindbody connection; (2) experiential
practice of various mindfulness
meditations, mindful yoga, and body
awareness during group meetings
and encouragement of home practice;
and (3) group discussion focused
on the application of mindfulness to
everyday situations and problemsolving related to barriers to
effective practice.5,13,14 The MBSR
program includes a number of
formal and informal techniques,
all of which share the goal of
2
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/137/1/e20152532/1062622/peds_20152532.pdf
byUniversityLibraryUtrechtuser
PEDIATRICS Volume 137 , number 1 , January 2016
enhancing nonjudgmental presentfocused awareness, aimed to reduce
dysregulated focus on the past (ie,
rumination) and worries about the
future (ie, anxiety).
Our previously-adapted 12-week,
school-based MBSR curriculum10
was taught by 2 experienced MBSR
instructors, both with long-standing
personal meditation practices,
>10 years’ experience teaching
mindfulness, and MBSR instructor
training through the University
of Massachusetts Center for
Mindfulness. The MBSR instructors
met regularly to optimize program
implementation. The adapted MBSR
program remains consistent with
typical MBSR programs for adults
and with MBSR core content.13
In addition, the content, course
structure, sequence of content
presentation, and core mindfulness
practices are maintained. Students
attended an average of ∼80%
(74%–85%) of the program sessions
and anecdotally reported especially
enjoying the mind jar and worry box
activities.
Active Control Program
HT is an age-appropriate general
health program structured to match
MBSR, including number and length
of classes, location, didactic and
experiential instruction, and group
size. The HT program covers ageappropriate topics such as nutrition,
exercise, body systems, adolescence,
and puberty. HT was adapted from
the Glencoe Health Curriculum
(McGraw Hill, 2005) and is designed
to control for the effects of a
positive adult instructor, peer group
experience, attention, and time. It
was taught by 3 trained, experienced
health instructors. Students attended
an average of ∼80% (76%–88%) of
the program sessions.
Implementation
Our community partner, Elev8
Baltimore, had 3 years of experience
with school administration and
staff at both schools. In discussion
with Elev8, school administrators
agreed to incorporate MBSR and
HT programs into the school
curriculum and work with the
program staff to facilitate scheduling
and implementation. Program
staff worked closely with Elev8
staff and program instructors to
enhance program implementation,
school support, and the community
partnership. Both schools offered
other programs to middle school
students focused on mentorship,
homework assistance, and afterschool activities, but no other
programs directly targeted stress.
Measures
Data were collected by program staff
(not instructors) during class time
over 2 sequential days at baseline
and after completion of the 12-week
programs. Makeup data collection
for absent students was conducted
on a case-by-case basis over the
following few days. Valid, reliable,
age-appropriate self-report surveys
were used to measure outcomes
of interest, including mindfulness,
psychological functioning, and
trauma symptoms.
Mindfulness was measured with the
10-item Children’s Acceptance and
Mindfulness Measure,15–17 which
had good reliability in our sample
(α = 0.74 and 0.73). The widely used
Perceived Stress Scale18 showed low
reliability within our sample (α =
0.41 and 0.29); by using exploratory
factor analysis (EFA) methods, we
extracted 2 factors: positive/coping
(4 items) and stress (6 items),
which had improved reliability (α =
0.64–0.75).
Psychological symptoms measured
were depressive symptoms
(Children’s Depression Inventory—
Short Form [CDI-S]19); paranoid
ideation, hostility, somatization,
by using the Symptom Checklist90-R (SCL-90-R)20; and anxiety
(Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for
Children [MASC]).21 The CDI-S had
good reliability within our sample
(α = 0.84). The SCL-90-R showed
acceptable to excellent reliability in
our sample (hostility α = 0.86 and
0.85; somatization α = 0.87 and 0.90;
paranoid ideation α = 0.67 and 0.71).
The MASC is a measure of anxiety,
with excellent reliability in our
sample (α = 0.89).
We assessed mood and emotion
regulation with the following
measures: Positive and Negative
Affect Schedule (PANAS),22 the
Differential Emotions Scale (DES),23
the Aggression scale,24 and the StateTrait Anger Expression Inventory
(STAXI-2).25 The PANAS yields 2
factors: positive affect and negative
affect, with good reliability in our
sample (positive affect α = 0.81
and 0.89; negative affect α = 0.84
and 0.87). The DES yields several
factors found to have acceptable
reliability and validity in youth26 and
adequate reliability in our sample
(α = 0.61–0.81). The Aggression
Scale has sufficient reliability and
validity in similar populations27 and
excellent reliability in our sample
(α = 0.92). The STAXI is a measure
of anger expressivity, from which
we used 2 subscales: temperamental
expressivity and reactive
expressivity. The measure has been
found to have adequate reliability
and validity in African American
youth28 and was reliable with our
sample (α = 0.78–0.80).
Coping was measured by using
the Children’s Response Style
Questionnaire (CRSQ),29 the Brief
COPE,30 and the Coping Self-Efficacy
Scale (CSE).31 The CRSQ measures
3 types of reactions: rumination,
problem solving, and distraction with
adequate reliability (rumination α =
0.86 and 0.87; problem solving α =
0.68 and 0.73; distraction α = 0.67
and 0.70). The Brief COPE measures
14 coping approaches with 2 items
each. Given the many subdomains,
confirmatory factor analysis (CFA)
method was used to identify typically
positive coping approaches (16
3
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/137/1/e20152532/1062622/peds_20152532.pdf
byUniversityLibraryUtrechtuser
 SIBINGA et al
items: use of instrumental support,
active coping, distraction, venting,
positive humor, use of emotional
support, positive reframing,
planning, and religion) and typically
negative coping approaches (9
items: behavioral disengagement,
denial, substance abuse, negative
humor, and self-blame). The factors
demonstrated adequate reliability
(α = 0.73–0.88). Finally, the CSE
creates an overall variable of coping
self-efficacy with excellent reliability
in this sample (α = 0.96).
We measured posttraumatic
symptoms by using the Children’s
Post-Traumatic Symptom Severity
Checklist (CPSS).32 Unfortunately,
an administrative error led to
the inadvertent omission of the
CPSS from the baseline survey; we
have CPSS data from postprogram
only. Because all other measures
were comparable between groups
at baseline, we infer that CPSS
was as well. The measure has
adequate reliability and validity in
socioeconomically disadvantaged
youth33 and excellent reliability in
our sample (α = 0.94). Furthermore,
2 factors were generated from the
CPSS: depressive symptoms (10
items) and reexperiencing symptoms
(6 items). Both factors were found to
have good reliability (depressive α =
0.92, reexperiencing α = 0.85).
Sample Size
A priori power calculations
demonstrated power >80% with
a sample of at least N = 90 based
on previous work with small to
moderate effects (β ranging from
0.38 to 0.51; ΔR2 ranging from 0.04
to 0.54) for associations between
MBSR participation and outcomes of
coping and psychological symptoms.
Thus, ample power was present for
this study.
Data Analysis
Preliminary data analysis included
EFA and CFA to determine the most
appropriate factor structure for each
measure. EFA employed principal
components analysis methods with
varimax rotation. CFA methods used
maximum likelihood extraction
methods with varimax rotation
and were used for all measures to
examine the factor structure. EFA
methods were used when CFA
results suggested potential deviation
from expected factor structures
among established scales. Where
applicable, EFA and CFA results
were presented in the Measures
section above. Preliminary analyses
examined descriptive statistics (eg,
means, median, proportions) for all
study variables of interest. Given
that data collection at both time
points was held over 2 class periods,
missing data due to attrition/absence
occurred. Although we provided
classes to 400 students at 2 schools,
baseline data were collected from
300 students, with subsequent data
collection sessions ranging from 292
to 300 students (72.8%–74.8%).
Missing data analyses demonstrated
that missingness was due largely to
attrition/absence and did not present
in an obvious pattern. Given that data
were collected at the aggregate level
(not linked by individual student
over time), it was not possible to
examine participant characteristics
in relation to missing data over the
course of the study. Initial analyses
examined potential differences
in participant characteristics and
demographics across intervention
groups at baseline by using
independent samples t tests for
continuous variables and χ2 analyses
for categorical variables. To test the
overall potential intervention effect,
multivariate linear regression models
were examined. A binary grouping
variable (intervention versus control)
was the main predictor with outcome
variables of interest at follow-up. All
models included gender, age, and
school as covariates. Each outcome
variable of interest was examined in
a separate model due to collinearity.
Given the data structure of students
within grades and within schools,
mixed effects models were examined
with random effects for grade. The
random effect for grade was not
significant in any models and was
thus removed from further analyses.
We hypothesized that MBSR would
improve participants’ psychological
functioning.
RESULTS
Three hundred students in the fifth
through eighth grades participated
and provided survey data from 2
urban elementary/middle schools.
Study participants were 50.7%
female and 99.7% African American
(Table 1). Approximately 99% of
participants were eligible for free or
reduced meals. When comparing HT
and MBSR groups at baseline, χ2 tests
revealed no significant differences in
gender (P = .99), ethnicity (P = .32),
age (P = .45), nor any study variables
of interest (P = .10–.99). The lack of
significant differences at baseline
suggests that randomization resulted
in balanced study arms.
On the basis of our randomization
scheme, we conducted 14 separate
classes of 21 to 37 students each
at 2 schools. Multivariate models
demonstrated significant differences
between MBSR and HT program
participants after implementation of
the 12-week programs; compared
with HT, students who had
participated in the MBSR program
showed better psychological
functioning and coping. As shown in
Table 2, MBSR participants reported
lower levels of depressive symptoms
(β = –0.16, P = .02), self-hostility
(β = –0.14, P = .02), somatization
(β = –0.13, P = .03), negative affect
(β = –0.19, P = .003), negative coping
(β= –0.13, P = .04), and rumination
(β = –0.13, P = .03). Importantly, MBSR
students also showed significantly
lower levels of posttraumatic stress
symptoms (β = –0.15, P = .02),
including in both subdomains of
depressive (β = –0.13, P = .03) and
reexperiencing (β = −0.17, P = .008)
4
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/137/1/e20152532/1062622/peds_20152532.pdf
byUniversityLibraryUtrechtuser
PEDIATRICS Volume 137 , number 1 , January 2016
symptoms. No significant adverse
events were reported.
DISCUSSION
In our school-based RCT of an
adapted MBSR program compared
with an active control (HT) for
vulnerable urban youth, MBSR
participants showed significant
improvements in psychological
symptoms, coping, and a reduction
in posttraumatic symptoms. In
particular, they had lower levels
of depressive symptoms, selfhostility, somatization, negative
mood, negative coping approaches,
and posttraumatic symptoms.
This rigorous school-based RCT,
informed by implementation
science, supports the hypothesis
that the MBSR program is effective
primary prevention for the negative
effects of toxic stress and trauma,
and ultimately beneficial for urban
youth.
Research on mindfulness for children
and youth is beginning to emerge,34
but few randomized active-controlled
trials of school-based mindfulness
instruction exist in the literature
and populations are limited. Britton
conducted a RCT in a private
independent school comparing a
mindfulness meditation class with
an active control (n = 101), finding
that mindfulness was associated with
reductions in thoughts of self-harm.35
A recent trial of a mindfulness
program compared with a social
responsibility control in a mostly
middle-class population showed that
mindfulness led to positive outcomes
in psychological symptoms, cognitive
control, interpersonal outcomes,
and stress physiology.36 Although
these findings are promising,
little information is available on
mindfulness instruction for
low-income, urban, minority
populations.
Important aspects of implementation
were addressed in this trial: an
evidence-based program; Elev8
Baltimore’s school-based staff
and experience with each school’s
students, staff, and administration;
dedicated staff to coordinate
program implementation and data
collection and link with teachers
and school staff; dedicated program
instructors; and reasonably accepting
administration. Furthermore, our
RCT used specific strategies to
ensure the delivery of high-quality
program content and process in
both study arms: instructors were
trained, experienced, and dedicated
mindfulness and health education
instructors who brought expertise
regarding program content and
delivery; the mindfulness curriculum
was previously tested and had been
adapted from the evidence-based
MBSR program8,10; communication
between program and Elev8 staff
was supported by weekly meetings;
and the community partnership
functioned effectively to navigate
challenges that arose related to
logistics, school administration, and
implementation.
There are a number of limitations of
this study. These include variability
of student session engagement and
attendance, no information regarding
outside student mindfulness
exposure and/or practice,
missing data, variability in school
administration support for programs,
and variability in classroom teacher
support for programs.
However, the trial also has a number
of notable strengths. The RCT study
design with an active comparison
group (controlling for positive adult
instructor and group activity) and
comparable groups at baseline
provides a high level of confidence
that the improvements seen in
the MBSR arm are due specifically
to the mindfulness aspects of the
intervention, as opposed to baseline
differences and/or other nonspecific
intervention effects. Furthermore,
because this is a group-based
prevention program, program costs
may well be offset by decreased need
for behavioral and mental health
interventions.
Given the unmanageable toxic
stress and trauma experienced by
many urban youth, these findings
are important and timely. Efforts
to improve the circumstances in
which urban youth live are essential
and impactful. This study provides
additional support for efforts to
include high-quality mindfulness
instruction to enhance students’
capacity to manage the inevitable
stress and trauma they will face,
as well as in trauma-informed
approaches. Depressive and
posttraumatic stress symptoms have
been linked with impaired academic
performance and attendance.37,38 By
5
TABLE 1 Baseline Characteristics, n (%)
HT MBSR Total
n = 141 (47.0%) n = 159 (53.0%) n = 300
Gender (n = 298)
 Female 71 (50.7) 80 (50.6) 151 (50.7)
 Male 69 (49.3) 78 (49.4) 147 (49.3)
Ethnicity (n = 258)
 African American 129 (99.2) 128 (100) 257 (99.7)
 White 1 (0.8) 0 (0.0) 1 (0.4)
Grade
 Fifth 28 (19.9) 45 (28.3) 73 (24.3)
 Sixth 48 (34.0) 34 (21.4) 82 (27.3)
 Seventh 15 (10.6) 45 (28.3) 60 (20.0)
 Eighth 50 (35.5) 35 (22.0) 85 (28.3)
Site
 School A 98 (69.5) 90 (56.6) 188 (62.7)
 School B 43 (30.5) 69 (43.4) 112 (37.3)
Downloaded from http://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article-pdf/137/1/e20152532/1062622/peds_20152532.pdf
byUniversityLibraryUtrechtuser
 SIBINGA et al
providing high-quality mindfulness
instruction during childhood,
improvements in psychological
symptoms, coping, and posttraumatic
symptoms have the potential to shift
life trajectories in meaningful ways,
including academic performance,
mental and physical health, and
quality of life.
CONCLUSIONS
As we continue to learn that many
adult diseases have their roots in
childhood exposure to stress and
trauma, it is essential to intervene
with primary prevention strategies
to reduce their negative effects
among children and youth. This trial
provides convincing evidence that
high-quality school-based MBSR
instruction for youth in urban public
schools is feasible, acceptable,
and leads to improvements in
psychological symptoms, coping,
and posttraumatic stress symptoms.
Improvements in these domains may
ultimately reduce the negative impact
of stress and trauma experienced in
childhood and adolescence and lead
to significant positive shifts, when
imagined over the life course.
