Abstract
 An ecological approach to bullying prevention is critical for the reduction of bullying
and victimization. Any intervention implemented in a school to reduce bullying should include a
variety of targets on all levels of the ecology and these interventions need to be sustainable by
the school following introduction of the intervention. Schools are more aware today that
bullying victimization causes harm to all those involved. Victims of school bullying suffer from
increased mental health problems, perpetrators of bullying are more likely to enter the legal
system and school communities have a more negative school culture that makes it harder for
students to learn. States are requiring schools to be more accountable for eliminating bullying in
school and schools respond by implementing research-based bullying prevention programs. The
Olweus Bullying Prevention program has demonstrated effectiveness in elementary schools yet
has limited research on its effectiveness in high schools. Considerable research has demonstrated
the effectiveness of Olweus Bullying Prevention program in reducing bullying, victimization and
other school related problems. However, less is known about the program’s impact to reduce
bullying behaviors in high school settings.
The present study aimed at evaluating the Olweus Bullying Prevention program in a high
school setting. Two high schools in the Midwestern region participated in the study with one
school as the experiment school by implementing the Olweus program during one academic
year. 699 students completed the Olweus Bully/Victim questionnaire at the beginning and end of
the school year. The within group repeated design was employed to investigate the pre and post
implementation difference and the MANOVA was performed to compare the differences in
bullying and victimization between control and experimental school.
PREVIEW
ii
The results showed no statistically significant effect of the intervention for reducing
bullying others or bullying victimization. There was a slight reduction in bullying victimization
in “hot spots” but this was not statistically significant. The possible reasons for failing to find
any significant differences were discussed in relation to the ecological fitness of any prevention
and intervention programs. The implications from the findings of this study illustrated the
importance of supportive local administration and staff members in successful implementation of
Olweus program It is equally important for Olweus trainers create a favorable working
relationship with school administration and the bullying prevention coordinating committee,
assess the school’s readiness to implement the program, help the school address these issues
prior to implementation. During the intervention period, it is critical that a variety of
interventions are implemented on all levels of the school’s ecological system
Problem Statement
Three girls chased sixteen year old Desiree Dryer down the hallway of her school through
the hustle of children changing classes. Desiree found safety in the restroom at the end of the hall
and locked herself in the toilet stall farthest from the doorway1
.
“We will kill you, you wait” one girl threatened as she stood in the doorway holding the
door open to the restroom. “If it doesn’t happen here, we will get you at home or at cheerleading.
You can’t hide”.
Desiree, horrified, called her mother from her cell phone as she sat crying on the floor of
the girl’s restroom. She cried hysterically for about 30 minutes as she talked to her mother and
then walked to the principal’s office as her mother suggested. The principal called the other girls
into his office with Desiree and told them all to stop the drama, and that if they did not, they
would all be suspended from school for three days. Following the meeting, Desiree went back to
her class and was unable to concentrate on her work. She wrote a small note on a piece of paper
that she tore from the back of one of her textbooks that she planned to give to her friend during
the next class:
They blamed it all on me. Mr. Jones told them that if anyone said one word as they walked
out of the office it would be a three day suspension. What do you know, the second they left,
Ashley it was, like, I swear, I want to hit something or someone, they didn’t do shit. No I
don’t know if I will be able to switch classes or not, so I think I will be changing schools or
something and you know that they’re not going to stop anyway.

1
 Adapted from personal interviews with Donna Dryer, Desiree Dreyer’s mother 2007, 2008.
PREVIEW
2
Following years of persistent bullying, life seemed to slowly close in around Desiree in
an isolating cloud of torment, fear, and self-blame from the actions of those who would later
mourn her loss.
She sat in her room on the third day absent from school because she was sick, what her
mother were later describe as “silent pain”. She read the text message sent from Amber. “You
are worthless and no one, including Cameron, wants you, so you might as well kill yourself”.
She likely saw little originality in Amber’s suggestion, since Desiree had probably thought about
it on many occasions and may have practiced the scenario about as many times.
She sent several text messages and one last one to her friend Ashley “Just tell me, who is
saying it and what are they saying?” Life ended for Desiree that afternoon by her choice of one
undesirable option, an option considered, practiced and set aside until that day, one ending with
death but surely more about escape.
Desiree’s situation was a long road of increasingly hurtful attacks on her physical and
emotional sense of self, perpetrated by several kids at her school. By definition, school bullying
is when a student is exposed, repeatedly and over time, to the negative actions on the part of one
or more other students (Olweus, 1993; Olweus, Limber, and Mihalic, 1999).Though cases of
suicide such as that of Desiree’s are rare, bullying behavior is unfortunately a common childhood
experience, with estimates that 1 in 5 children in elementary school can expect to experience
some form of bullying (Whitney & Smith, 1991; Smith &Wilson, 1998).
Those children that are bullied will face a variety of negative outcomes. Escape from
bullying will be difficult, for not only is it common, but it happens in all locations in the school
building, including the classroom with the teacher present.
PREVIEW
3
Bullying seriously affects many aspects of life for children who are targeted. Bully
victimization has been found to be related to lower self-esteem, higher rates of depression and
anxiety. Victims of bullying have greater occurrence of thoughts of suicide (Limber, et al,
2004). The United States Department of Justice and The National Association of School
Psychologists (NASP) estimate that 160,000 children miss school each day because of fear (Lee,
1993).
In cases of persistent bullying, children may consider suicide or homicide as a means of
escaping from bullying. For example, in a study with Australian children, those who reported
being bullied at least once a week were twice as likely as their peers to “wish they were dead” or
admit having a recurring thoughts of committing suicide (Rigby, 1996). In another study of
school-shooters done by the United States Secret Service and the United States Department of
Education (2002), 71% of the attackers felt persecuted, bullied, threatened, attacked or injured by
others.
State governments are increasingly becoming involved in creating legislation that
requires schools to create policies and prohibit bullying. In response, schools are looking to find
proven methods for eliminating bullying in their school. There is growing research that
demonstrates that prevention programs are effective at reducing bullying behavior and related
aggression. The Olweus Bullying Prevention Program (Olweus, 1993), the Steps to Respect
Program (Committee for Children, 2008) and Peace Builders (Christie, Petrie, and Christie,
1999; Flannery, et al 2003) are examples of accepted programs that have demonstrated positive
results. The research mostly validates efficacy of programs with elementary age children. But
research with middle school students was scarce and no research on the Olweus program for high
school students could be identified. In other words, absent in the 20 years of research on the
PREVIEW
4
Olweus Bullying Prevention program is evidence of its effect as a prevention program for middle
and high school children.
Since high school students are not immune to school bullying, high schools also need
proven methods for preventing and reducing bullying behavior. This research will add a very
necessary ingredient to a large body of research that has failed to examine the Olweus program’s
effectiveness for post-elementary school children.
Research Goals
The goal of this research was to evaluate the Olweus Bullying Prevention Program in a
high school setting. There are a variety of reasons why this particular program was chosen for
evaluation. The primary reason was that the Olweus program has a considerable amount of
research available that has demonstrated its effectiveness (Olweus, 1991; Olweus, 20.04; Limber
et al., 2004; Black, 2003) yet the research is sparse concerning its effectiveness for high school
populations. This study will offer a valuable contribution to the literature by showing the impact
the Olweus Bullying Prevention program has on a high school setting. It will also offer
supportive evidence for variances in gender and age differences related to bullying.
Research Questions
1. Will there be differences in students’ perception of the frequency of bullying victimization in
the experimental school between the beginning and end of Olweus Bullying Prevention Program
implementation?
PREVIEW
5
2. Will the Olweus Bullying Prevention Program reduce bullying victimization by location in
their environment (i.e. hallway, bus stop or classroom) based on students’ perception as reported
on the Olweus Bullying Questionnaire?
3a. Will the Olweus Bullying Prevention Program reduce the number of bullying and other
aggressive incidents as identified by teacher’s discipline reports at the experimental school?
3b. Will this reduction be greater in the experimental school than in the control school?
4. Will there be differences between experimental school and control school in reduction of bully
victimization and bullying others evidenced by students’ responses on the Olweus survey?
5. Will there be grade level differences in the Olweus Programs effectiveness of reducing
bullying victimization between the experimental and control schools?
Hypothesis
H.1. Students will perceive that there is a decrease in bullying victimization at the experimental
school following implementation of the Olweus Bullying Prevention program at the end of the
academic year.
H.2. Students will report a reduction in bullying victimization in “hot spots” at the experimental
school from the time they are identified at pre-survey to the post-survey following the
implementation of the Olweus Bully Prevention Program.
H.3. There will be a reduction in the number of bullying and other aggressive incidents as
identified by teacher discipline reports at the experimental school between pre and post-survey
and this reduction will be greater than that at the control school.
H.4. The Olweus program at the experimental school will demonstrate effectiveness of reducing
bullying victimization and bullying others compared to the control school.
PREVIEW
6
H.5. The Olweus Program will be more effective at reducing bullying victimization for younger
students in the experimental than control schools.
Significance of the Study
This study will contribute to the research on school bullying by confirming that the
prevalence of bullying extends to high school settings. It has been estimated that one in five
children in primary and secondary schools are the victim of some type of bullying (Whitney &
Smith, 1991; Smith &Wilson, 1998) and this study will show that high schools are comparative.
Bullying causes harm to those that are victimized and those that that are bullied. Victims suffer a
wide range of emotional and physical symptoms, including depression. They report not wanting
to go to school and have higher rates of absenteeism (Fekkes, et al., 2004; Hansen, et al., 2006;
Limber, et al, 2004; Limber, et al, 2004; Rigby, 1999). This study will add to this research by
identifying the level of fear high school students experience while in school.
The Olweus Bullying Prevention Program, which originates from Norway and considered
the model whole-school approach by school professionals, has shown excellent results with
reducing bullying behavior in several studies in Norway (Olweus, 1993). This study will add to
the theoretical understanding of bullying prevention because it may show that bullying
prevention is less effective for high schools and point to a need for developing different models
for bullying prevention based on grade levels of school.
This study will add to the practice of bullying prevention because schools throughout this
country are investing large sums of money implementing the Olweus Bullying Prevention
program to reduce bullying behavior, believing it will increase school safety and better the
overall school climate. The research currently available is absent of studies that investigate the
Olweus program for high-school communities. Schools may use information from this study to
PREVIEW
7
make a more informed decision concerning which prevention program to select and ultimately
could have impact on financial decisions for schools that already face limited financial resources.
