ABSTRACT
The purpose of this quantitative study was to examine the influences of a school-based cultural
awareness program on ethnic identity and self-esteem in fifth grade early adolescents. The
development and implementation of a school-based cultural awareness program was intended to
offer students a basic foundation for the development and/or enhancement of ethnic identity and
self-esteem. 106 fifth grade early adolescents participated in this study. All participants were
recruited from one elementary school in the southeastern part of the United States. Participants
completed a research packet including the Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure (MEIM) and the
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSE) both before and after the program. Results indicated a
significant relationship between ethnic identity and self-esteem. Also, results of this study
showed a significant difference between ethnic identity and self-esteem after participation in the
cultural awareness program. The findings of this study are related to previous research. The
implications of this study, limitations, and suggestions for future research are discussed
INTRODUCTION
Various reasons for a culturally attentive guidance and counseling program exist, but it is
possible that the most important is the need to recognize and appreciate the ethnicity of all
children in order to enhance their self worth and dignity (Roth, 2005). Connolly and Hosken
(2006) confirmed that once children begin to notice cultural and physical differences, they also
develop the potential to negatively associate dissimilarities with individuals who are different
from themselves. Subsequently, uniquely different children can experience setbacks in many
forms including, but not limited to self-esteem. Umaña-Taylor and Updegraff (2007) indicated
that children with high self-esteem have more positive life outcomes. Furthermore, ethnic
minority children knowledgeable about their cultural background often have higher self-esteem.
―It is possible that ethnic identity can serve as a protective role for individuals’ self-esteem in
that it provides a positive sense of self‖ (Umaña-Taylor & Updegraff, 2007, p. 552). Fisher,
Wallace and Fenton (2000) proposed that an engagement with diversity, whether it be in the
form of a conversation or a chance meeting with a different population, affects the way a child
sees himself in the world. With that being said, it is imperative that school counselors
understand this and plan accordingly.
It is important to note that one of the most significant components of adolescents’ overall
development is identification (Erikson, 1968; Marcia, 1980). Erikson describes identity
formation as an exploration process in which youth develop a sense of self and begin to
understand and join together inner-self and personal well-being. Young people begin to answer
2
the question, ―Who am I?‖ Ethnic identity helps to answer this question as it is a large part of an
individual’s personality (Bernal & Knight, 1993).
According to Phinney, Lochner, and Murphy (1993), there should be two main areas of
focus when working with adolescents to enhance their ethnic identity: 1) lack of knowledge
and/or prejudice against themselves and their cultural group, and 2) recognition of the dominant
culture, their own culture, and the impact both have on their lives. Through exploration,
minority youth can begin to deal with such issues and eventually arrive at a sense of belonging
and commitment to culture.
Minority membership coupled with adolescence can lead to an at-risk status (Phinney et
al., 1993). Although several issues associated with adolescence can lead to such a status, failure
to explore ethnic identity is certainly among the list. Children who fail to explore their ethnic
identity are more susceptible to self-esteem exploitation. Without a stable sense of self, children
are less likely to be successful, personally and academically (Roth, 2005). A need for school
counselors to focus on ethnic identity exists because it is an important factor in the development
of self-esteem in children and adolescents.
Statement of the Problem
A lack of cultural awareness or cultural recognition equates to a lack of basic essentials
for the development of self-esteem (Roth, 2005). Because the number of minority youth in
America is increasing at a staggering rate, cultural awareness must increase as well (Bernal,
Knight, Ocampo, Garza, & Cota, 1993). School counselors are in a critical position and can
have an overwhelming effect on students’ self-esteem. It is important for school counselors to
attend to students’ differences while appreciating them at the same time (Bernal & Knight,
3
1993). Working with students without recognizing their differences can prove to be
unproductive.
Coleman and Lindwall (2008) advised that school counselors know
how to conceptualize, structure, and implement a CGCP [comprehensive guidance and
counseling program] that is attentive to the cultural needs of youth in today’s society and
allows the school counselor to continually be cognizant of how his or her work impacts
the development of youth (p. 205).
In addition, the authors asserted that by the time a child enters grade 12 he should be able to
demonstrate: a) knowledge and understanding of his own culture; b) the ability to effectively
explore, rationalize, and express cultural ideas; c) an understanding of the American culture; d)
the ability to work with diverse populations; and e) application of interpersonal conflict
resolution. Students demonstrating the aforementioned skills feel more self-assured and
comfortable discussing cultural issues than their uninformed counterparts (Umaña-Taylor &
Updegraff, 2007).
In schools, counselors should advocate for equal opportunity in order for equal
achievement to be obtained (Aboud & Doyle, 1993). Each student has particular characteristics,
traditions, and experience distinct issues and challenges (Bernal et al., 1993; Phinney & Kohatsu,
1997). Ignoring ethnic differences denies a central part of the individual. Ethnic individuality
needs to be recognized as it can serve as a key to educational success. It has been stated that
students with higher ethnic identity also possess higher self-esteem, which, in turn, leads to
higher academic achievement (Chappell & Overton, 2002; Cokely & Chapman, 2008; Phinney,
1992; Okwumabua, Wong, Duryea, Okwumabua, & Howell, 1999; Umaña-Taylor & Updegraff,
2007). Therefore, a need for culturally supportive educational environments is present.
4
Purpose Statement
The purpose of this quantitative study is to examine the effectiveness of a school-based
cultural awareness program as a means to enhance ethnic identity and improve self-esteem in
fifth grade early adolescents. Over the past few decades researchers have begun to investigate
the effectiveness of culturally relevant guidance and counseling programs. More importantly,
research studies on multicultural concerns have positively influenced schools and communities
(Chappell & Overton, 2002; Cokely & Chapman, 2008; Phinney, 1992; Okwumabua et al., 1999;
Umaña-Taylor & Updegraff, 2007). Unfortunately, studies focused on actual school-based
cultural awareness programs and their relationships to self-esteem are limited.
Significance of the Study
Because there is little research on actual programs for youth that focus on cultural
awareness, this study will add significantly to existing research and will inform future research.
In addition, students’ participation in the program will enhance their cultural awareness. Not
only will the students be more aware of their own culture, they will also be more aware of
others’ cultures. This too will lead to improved cultural sensitivity among the participants.
Specific Research Questions
This quantitative study is designed primarily to examine the influences of a school-based
cultural awareness program on ethnic identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students. The
overarching research question is as follows: What effect does a school-based cultural awareness
program have on students’ ethnic identity and self-esteem? The study addresses the following
secondary research questions:
5
1. Is there a relationship between self-esteem and ethnic identity in fifth grade students?
2. Is there a significant difference in mean self-esteem pretest and posttest scores on the
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale for fifth grade students who have participated in a schoolbased cultural awareness program when compared to fifth grade students who have not
participated in a school-based cultural awareness program?
3. Is there a significant difference in mean ethnic identity pretest and posttest scores on the
Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure for fifth grade students who have participated in a
school-based cultural awareness program when compared to fifth grade students who
have not participated in a school-based cultural awareness program?
It is predicted that student involvement in a cultural awareness program will increase the level of
ethnic identity and the level of self-esteem.
Hypotheses
The central research hypotheses most important to this study are presented in both the
null and alternate form and are as follows:
Ho1: There is insufficient evidence of a significant relationship between ethnic
 identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students.
Ha1: There is sufficient evidence of a significant relationship between ethnic
 identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students.
Ho2: There is insufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean self-esteem
 posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for pretest scores.
Ha2: There is sufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean self-esteem
 posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for pretest scores.
6
Ho3: There is insufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean ethnic
 identity posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for pretest
 scores.
Ha3: There is sufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean ethnic
 identity posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for
 pretest scores.
It is important to note that in hypotheses two and three the phrase ―method of instruction‖ refers
to the following: 1) participation in the school-based cultural awareness program, and 2) no
participation in the school-based cultural awareness program.
Definition of Terms
Ethnic identity. Having a ―commitment and sense of belonging to the group, positive
evaluation of the group, interest in and knowledge about the group, and involvement in social
activities of the group‖ (Phinney, Cantu, & Kurtz, 1997, p. 168).
Self-esteem. ―How individuals evaluate themselves favorably or unfavorably‖ (Ward &
Redd, 2007, p. 184).
Affirmation, belonging, and commitment. An affective element of ethnic identity that
includes satisfactory feelings towards and meaningful interactions with a particular ethnic group
(Erikson, 1968; Phinney, 1992).
Ethnic identity search. A developmental and cognitive element of ethnic identity that
includes exploration of what it means be a member of a particular ethnic group (Erikson, 1968;
Phinney, 1992).
7
Cultural awareness program. A six-week series of classroom guidance lessons that
lend to the development of an awareness of one's own culture, history, lifestyle, and experiences
while also learning the same about others.
Cultural diversity. ―The coexistence of different ethnic, gender, racial, and
socioeconomic groups within one social group‖
(http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/cultural+diversity).
Limitations
The major limitation of this study is that the generalizability of the results will be limited
to the particular grade level assessed within the specified school. Also, the participants may not
include a broad range of ethnic groups, which would limit the study’s generalizability for most
ethnic groups. The development of the program by the researcher must also be taken into
consideration.
Delimitations
Although not including all possible ethnic groups, research for this study will be
conducted in a diverse inner-city elementary school. Intact groups will be chosen on the basis of
their inherent diversity. A pre-test/post-test design will be utilized in the collection of the data.
Both tests were originally developed to be used with children and adolescents. The researcher
will be present for data collection to ensure that similar methods are employed.
Conclusion
This quantitative study is designed primarily to examine the influences of a school-based
cultural awareness program on ethnic identity and self-esteem in fifth grade early adolescents.
The study addresses the following research question: What effect does a cultural awareness
program have on students’ ethnic identity and self-esteem? It is predicted that student
8
involvement in a cultural awareness program will increase the students’ level of ethnic identity
and self-esteem. More specifically, it is believed that, initially, the level of ethnic identity will
increase, which is a direct catalyst for the increase in the level of self-esteem.
Organization of the Study
Chapter I provides an introduction to the study that includes the purpose statement,
statement of the problem, significance of the study, research questions, hypotheses, limitations,
and delimitations of the study. Chapter II consists of a review of the literature covering the areas
of ethnic identity development, the relationship between ethnic identity and self-esteem, the
impact of ethnic identity and self-esteem on academic achievement, and ethnic awareness
programs for children and adolescents. Chapter III provides the methodology, which contains
information about the selection of participants, instrumentation, experimental design, procedures,
statistical tests, and data analyses. Chapter IV presents the results by way of an in-depth
explanation of the findings of the study. Chapter V provides a discussion that links the findings
of the study with implications for school counselors and comprehensive guidance and counseling
programs.
9
CHAPTER II
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
This review of the literature will present research in the areas of ethnic identity and selfesteem. In an attempt to better understand ethnic identity, ethnic identity development literature
will be examined. When discussing the relationship between ethnic identity and self-esteem,
particular attention will be given to African-American, Latino-American, Asian-American, and
Biracial children. This will highlight issues that may require particular attention when working
with diverse youth. In order to further establish importance for school counselors’ awareness,
academic success as it relates to ethnic identity and/or self-esteem will also be considered.
Furthermore, a review of ethnic awareness programs will be included.
The literature will be presented in the following manner: 1) ethnic identity development,
2) relationship between ethnic identity and self-esteem, 3) impact of ethnic identity and/or selfesteem on academic achievement, and 4) various ethnic awareness programs involving children
and adolescents.
For the sake of this study, the operational definition of ethnic identity is having a
―commitment and sense of belonging to the group, positive evaluation of the group, interest in
and knowledge about the group, and involvement in social activities of the group‖ (Phinney et
al., 1997, p. 168). The operational definition of self-esteem is ―how individuals evaluate
themselves favorably or unfavorably‖ (Ward & Redd, 2007, p. 184).
10
Ethnic Identity Development
Connolly and Hosken (2006) found that children begin to notice differences in culture
and physical appearance as early as age three. Such recognition could be the foundation for
identification with one’s ethnic group. Furthermore, ethnic identity begins to develop in middle
childhood and adolescence (Holcomb-McCoy, 2005). Holcomb-McCoy proposed that during
adolescence, children begin to mature and develop their worldview. Children start to realize they
are members of a certain group of people and begin to identify with said group (Phinney et al.,
1997). Some researchers characterized ethnic identity as a developmental process occurring
most often in adolescence (Phinney, 1990; Whitehead, Ainsworth, Wittig, & Gadino, 2009). As
children enter this stage of their life, knowledge about and interactions with their culture begin to
resonate with them. Adolescents are developmentally capable of receiving and understanding
cultural contexts.
It is important to note that one of the most significant components of adolescents’ overall
development is identification (Erikson, 1968; Marcia, 1980). When adolescents begin to form an
identity, they are developing a sense of self and attaching meaning to it. Sometimes the meaning
of one’s existence is closely linked to that individual’s ethnic identity. It is, therefore, important
to understand how such an identity comes about.
In a research study, Phinney (1989) developed and tested the applicability of an ethnic
identity developmental model. The study included 91 African-American, Asian-American,
Latino-American and Caucasian adolescents from urban high schools. The study was mixedmethods, having both interviews and a questionnaire. Phinney found that minority adolescents
experienced a period in which the need to deal with their ethnicity was apparent. Additionally,
issues of prejudice, American standards of beauty, culturally-based academic pressures, and job
11
discrimination were found to plague the minority adolescents. Also, Caucasian adolescents
deemed their ethnicity as synonymous with American culture. This revealed a deficiency in
pluralistic ethnocentrism among this group of adolescents. Moreover, it was discovered that this
group of adolescents considered American culture to be centrally important in a society that is
made up of diverse members that value their traditional culture as most significant.
Phinney (1989) discovered that a large number of the participants had not yet explored
their ethnicity as an entity of their personal identity. One fourth of the participants had explored
their identity and another fourth felt confident as part of a particular ethnic group. Using the
Bronstein-Cruz Child/Adolescent Self-Concept and Adjustment Questionnaire, Phinney (1989)
postulated that those minority adolescents having explored and understood the meaning of their
ethnicity provided evidence of ―higher scores of self-evaluation, sense of mastery, social and
peer interactions, and family relations‖ (p. 47). This conclusion suggests that a connection to
one’s ethnicity is central to one’s sense of self.
Based on the previously discussed research study and the developmental models of
Erickson (1968) and Marcia (1980), Phinney (1990) provided a model of ethnic identity
development in adolescence that consists of three stages: unexamined ethnic identity, ethnic
identity search/moratorium, and ethnic identity achievement. According to Phinney’s model of
ethnic identity development, adolescents who have not yet explored their ethnic identity are in
the first stage of the model. These adolescents have little to no desire to become more
knowledgeable in their cultural context. Therefore, a lack of a clear understanding exists.
Adolescents in the ethnic identity search/moratorium stage are attempting to explore their
ethnic identity, but have not fully committed to what their findings may mean (Phinney, 1989,
1990). Adolescents in this stage are confused about what it means to belong to a particular
12
ethnic group. The last stage of the model is ethnic identity achievement. Adolescents in this
stage have explored and now understand and accept their ethnic group. Characteristics of
adolescents in this stage might be ethnic pride, a sense of belonging, and self-confidence
(Holcomb-McCoy, 2005; Phinney, 1989, 1990).
Whitehead et al. (2009) presented research that supports the stages of Phinney’s (1990)
ethnic identity development model. The authors developed and implemented two models that
measured adolescents’ level of ethnic identity exploration as well as ethnic identity affirmation
and belonging. The models were temporal in nature and participants included 571 adolescents
from various ethnic groups. Whitehead et al. determined that, over time, adolescents progress
from exploration (stage two of Phinney’s ethnic identity development model) to affirmation and
belonging (stage three of Phinney’s ethnic identity development model). This is opposed to the
alternative model that suggested a progression from affirmation and belonging to exploration.
The findings suggested that it is essential for adolescents to first explore their ethnicity in order
to achieve comfort and security in their ethnic identity. In addition, the results indicated that
once adolescents explore and discover the meaning attached to their ethnicity, they will then
develop a connection with their ethnic group, which brings about positive feelings for that group
and others.
Umaña-Taylor, Gonzales-Backen, and Guimond (2009) performed a longitudinal study in
order to determine if ethnic identity was a developmental process for 323 Latino adolescents. As
indicated in this study and previously discussed studies, ethnic identity appears to be a process
beginning with exploration and ending with understanding. Over the course of four years, the
researchers aimed to determine whether Latino adolescents’ ethnic identity exploration,
13
resolution, and affirmation increased with time. The authors reported significant positive linear
growth for each of the three variables ranging in time from middle to late adolescence.
Relationship Between Ethnic Identity and Self-Esteem in Children
It has been said that ethnic identity is a major contributor of self-esteem in children
(Phinney et al., 1997). This is said to be true across all ethnic/cultural groups of young people.
Furthermore, studies have revealed that the higher the ethnic identity of children, the higher the
self-esteem (Alvarez & Helms, 2001; Holcomb-McCoy, 2005; Phinney et al.; Smith, Levine,
Smith, Dumas, & Prinz, 2009). As stated in the operational definition, a sense of belonging is an
important entity of ethnic identity. Holcomb-McCoy (2005) and Phinney et al. stressed the
significant relationship between positive identification with one’s ethnic group and positive selfesteem. It appears that a sense of belonging, in particular, is essential to the self-esteem of
children. Those children with strong feelings of belonging and high levels of ethnic identity are
often the same children cognizant of discrimination and racism. Even still, children’s selfesteem remains in tact because they have more effective ways of dealing with such issues
(Holcomb-McCoy, 2005). It can be inferred that children in healthy relationships are well
adjusted and equipped with the tools needed to handle everyday-life issues.
Feeling a positive connection with one’s ethnic group carries a great deal of weight in a
child’s development. It is important that school counselors recognize this relationship and plan
accordingly. Before ethnic awareness efforts can be put in place, there are other factors
regarding ethnic identity and self-esteem in children that need to be addressed. The next section
of this literature review will focus on specific ethnic groups and corresponding areas for
consideration.
14
African-American Youth. With age, African-American children have a particular need
to feel close to their ethnic group (Phinney et al., 1997; Smith et al., 2009). Smith et al. declared
that a positive sense of belonging to the African- American culture is almost synonymous with
healthy development. This is an extremely important factor to consider when working with
African-American youth. Even more, group identification may be a greater issue for AfricanAmerican girls. According to Smith et al., African-American boys possessed a higher level of
group identification than their female counterparts. Because group identification is such an
essential component of African-American youth’s healthy development, it is apparent that
special attention should be given to African-American girls whose sense of belonging may be
wavering. African-American girls and boys depend upon the support of parents, friends, the
community, and so forth. Phinney et al. and Smith et al. stated that girls may tend to need a bit
more emotional support.
Latino-American Youth. There seems to be little research on this population in regard
to ethnic identity and self-esteem. Nonetheless, a group of particular researchers (Phinney et al.,
1997) discovered a few factors that influence the ethnic identity and self-esteem of LatinoAmerican children. Similar to African-American youth, Phinney et al. found that gender plays a
role in the ethnic identity and self-esteem of Latino-American youth. Latino-American boys
have a more positive ethnic identity, thus, more positive self-esteem. Latino-American girls may
require more in-group support and validation. Family is very important within the LatinoAmerican community. Furthermore, familial relationships affect the levels of ethnic identity and
self-esteem in their children. Level of acculturation is yet another factor to consider. Phinney et
al. proposed that low levels of acculturation tend to associate with poor language skills, which
translates into little communication with others that can then result in few friendships. One more
15
area of consideration regarding Latino-American youth is the manner in which they take in other
groups’ attitudes toward their culture. Phinney et al. concluded that the way Latino-American
children perceive other groups’ view of them affects the way they feel about their cultural
identity and self-worth.
Asian-American Youth. As with Latino-American children, little research was found
pertaining to ethnic identity and self-esteem. According to Alvarez and Helms (2001) myths
exist that suggest Asian-American children are accepted in America and do not experience issues
like racism, low self-esteem, or low levels of ethnic identity. On the contrary, Asian-American
youth do encounter these problems and it is important to address them. One very important area
to consider when assessing ethnic identity and self-esteem is racial ―messages‖ (Alvarez &
Helms, 2001, p. 218). The authors explained that racial messages are communications related to
race sent by family, friends, schools, churches, and other social groups that attach value to
Asian-American youth’s culture and sense of self. These messages shape the perceptions these
children have about themselves. When Asian-American children receive positive racial
messages, they tend to have a greater sense of ethnic pride, which, in turn, leads to a higher selfesteem. Moreover, Asian-American children hold a very high regard for other Asian-Americans.
This being so, it is imperative that parents, peers, and the community play a positive role in the
development of their youth.
Biracial Youth. Biracial children are met with a unique set of circumstances. Because
biracial children stem from more than one ethnic group, they often experience a lack of social
acceptance and group identification (Benedetto & Olisky, 2001; Ward & Redd, 2007). This can
lead to feelings of inadequacy, estrangement, or paranoia. Ward and Redd suggested that
another area of concern for biracial youth is skin color. The degree of color in the skin is said to
16
affect the relationships biracial children have with others. Family and community members as
well as society as a whole are sometimes unsure about the type of interactions they wish to have
with biracial children based on their skin color. More than any other ethnic group of children,
biracial children encounter prejudice from all sides, sometimes not even being accepted by either
ethnic group.
Impact of Ethnic Identity and/or Self-Esteem on Academic Achievement
The Education Trust’s National Center for Transforming School Counseling (TSC), one
of the nation’s leading school counseling organizations, supports the idea that school counselors
are an integral part of students’ academic achievement (Pérusse & Colbert, 2007; Pérusse,
Goodnough, Donegan, & Jones, 2004). In demonstrating the relationship between ethnic identity
and self-esteem, it is also important to show how these entities contribute to academic success.
Even today, schools are plagued with ethnic/racial segregation and these disparities are mirrored
in academic achievement.
Steele (1999) suggested that stereotypical views of minorities’ academic abilities could
be detrimental to their ability to achieve. In this particular study, Steele tested both AfricanAmerican and Caucasian individuals using sample questions from a standardized test. The test
was given twice under different circumstances. The first test was given under the instruction that
it was to measure intellectual ability. The second test was understood to be a task invented to
study how individuals solve problems differently. Steele determined that the African-American
participants performed as well as their Caucasian counterparts when the test was presented as
something other than an assessment of intellectual ability. Steele deducted that susceptibility to
stereotypes could negatively affect academic performance across ethnic groups. Furthermore,
17
internalized views about one’s ethnicity can result in damaged self-esteem, which may lead to
low overall performance.
Chappell and Overton (2002) performed a research study that related socioeconomic
status, ethnic identity, and self-esteem to 330 African-American adolescents’ ability to
deductively reason and perform in school. The research revealed that participants with higher
ethnic identity scores also demonstrated higher reasoning abilities. The authors inferred that
adolescents possessing a positive view of their ethnic group held a more positive view of their
cognitive abilities.
Cokley and Chapman (2008) performed a study that examined whether ethnic identity
had an impact on the academic self-concept of African-American students. The participants
included 274 African-American college students within a predominantly African-American
university in the south. The research determined that a positive ethnic identity predicted higher
academic self-concepts among the participants. Those students with higher academic selfconcepts also had higher grades. This conclusion suggested an indirect yet significant link
between ethnic identity and grade point average.
In a similar study, Phinney (1992) examined the level of ethnic identity exploration as a
potential method to increase academic confidence. The author noted that negative attitudes about
minority groups’ intellectual abilities could lead to low academic performance. Phinney
investigated the level of ethnic identity in high school students from multiple ethnic groups. The
study found that high school students with a 3.0 grade point average or higher also scored higher
in regards to ethnic identity. Students with grades averaging in the C or D range scored lower on
the ethnic identity measure. Phinney proposed that ethnic identity could serve as a protective
force against stereotypes that weaken students’ academic self-concept.
18
Whitesell, Mitchell, Spicer, and The Voices of Indian Teens Project Team (2009)
investigated important factors related to the academic success of American Indian adolescents.
Among these factors were self-esteem and ethnic identity. The sample included 1,611
adolescents from the Voices of Indian Teens Project. The study was longitudinal in nature and
occurred over the course of three years. The results showed a strong relationship between selfesteem and positive academic achievement. Furthermore, it was determined that self-esteem had
a larger impact on academic success than did academic success on self-esteem. In contrast to
other studies, there was no significant relationship between American Indian identity and
academic success. Whitesell et al. implied that further research of the American Indian culture
might be necessary in order to understand this discrepant view.
Research on the impact of ethnic identity and self-esteem on academic achievement
varies, but overall support for the enhancement of ethnic identity as an agent for academic
success exists. With this in mind, it is important to review how ethnic awareness is being
communicated to school-aged children.
Ethnic Awareness Programs for Children and Adolescents
National standards insist that school counselors ―develop comprehensive guidance and
counseling programs that appropriately address multicultural issues‖ (Coleman & Lindwall,
2008, p. 204). Furthermore, research has indicated that ethnic identity and self-esteem have a
positive relationship. It is believed that children educated about their ethnic identity are often
times the children with high self-esteem and academic success (Chappell & Overton, 2002;
Cokely & Chapman, 2008; Phinney, 1992; Okwumabua et al., 1999; Umaña-Taylor &
Updegraff, 2007). The following is a review of past research in respect to specific cultural/ethnic
identity programs and their influences.
19
Cultural awareness activities can be infused very early in a child’s education. Kirk and
Anicich (1996) developed a cultural awareness program for kindergarten students. The program
consisted of many activities including, but not limited to journal entries, theatrical play, arts and
crafts, culturally specific music and songs, as well as diagramming variations of physical
appearance. The program ended with the assembling of a ―Culture Quilt‖ (Kirk & Anicich,
1996, p. 312). Through intense observation, the authors were able to convey that, after being
educated, the children felt empowered and accepting of every student in the class. The students
were holding hands and sharing hugs. The innate goodness of each child was revealed and a
community was formed.
Similarly, Connolly and Hosken (2006) worked with children of a very young age. Their
program included eight classes made up of students ages six and seven. The program aimed to
increase students’ awareness of cultural differences. The students participated in activities such
as theatrical play as well as various activities led by teachers in the classroom during circle time.
The study had the following objectives: ―increase children’s ability to recognize, without
prompting, instances of social exclusion; reduce children’s tendency to stereotype others by
increasing their awareness of the many different things that children share in common; increase
children’s willingness to be more inclusive of others who are different from themselves‖
(Connolly & Hosken, 2006, p. 111). The authors used pictures to measure the effects of the
program. For example, students were asked to describe what they saw in a photograph of a
group of children playing on the playground. The students’ responses were recorded and then
coded. Connolly and Hosken claimed a ―significant degree of success‖ (2006, p. 122). They
found the program to be effective in that it increased the children’s ability to notice differences
20
and examples of exclusion. Although the study did not intend to measure a change in students’
attitudes, the teacher interviews revealed that the students began to realize their individual worth.
African-American male youth are more likely to become involved in criminal activity
than youth from the majority culture (1994 West Tennessee Juvenile Court Report as cited in
Okwumabua et al., 1999, p. 62). Okwumabua et al. suggested a need for culturally relevant
programs that help young people develop a more positive disposition and attitude toward their
own culture. In turn, these young people will have better relationships with others, a more
positive self-esteem, and eliminate antisocial behaviors. Okwumabua et al. performed a study
intended to reduce criminal activity within a group of African-American youth. The study had
the following objectives: enhance self-esteem, teach decision-making and conflict-resolution
skills, and improve cultural awareness. Regarding cultural awareness, the youth were exposed to
encouraging places and information that related to their culture. The authors determined, by way
of two attitudinal scales, that the youths’ self-esteem, impression of their physical traits, and
cultural identity greatly improved after completing the program.
Umaña-Taylor and Updegraff (2007) conducted a study that examined self-esteem as it
relates to Latino adolescents’ ethnic identity and other cultural factors. Because of the everincreasing number of Latino youth coupled with the common mental health issues associated
with this population, the authors deemed their study significant. Their study indicated that the
higher the levels of ethnic identity the higher the levels of self-esteem in Latino boys and girls.
Umaña-Taylor and Updegraff were determined to discover and reveal the cultural factors, both
developmental and psychological, that can negatively or positively affect Latino youth. Equally,
the authors concluded that high self-esteem and a high level of ethnic identity prove to buffer the
21
risk of mental illness. Furthermore, ethnic identity shields a child’s self-esteem by providing
confidence and solidity within the sense of self.
A review of the literature indicates there are no researched programs on ethnic awareness
for fifth grade students. For the purpose of this study, an ethnic awareness program was
developed by the primary researcher (see Appendix A). The program activities include art,
music, writing, sandtray, and games.
Conclusion
In closing, it has been revealed that ethnic identity and self-esteem are related. In some
instances, a higher ethnic identity and/or self-esteem can result in higher academic achievement.
Nevertheless, empirical evidence varied throughout the literature, therefore, calling for further
research. Past literature has, however, shown that higher degrees of ethnic identity tend to
positively affect a child’s sense of self. Also, past literature indicates that educational programs
aimed at cultural awareness can increase students’ sensitivity towards diversity. Given this
information, it is important that a clear understanding of successful awareness programs and their
effectiveness exist.
The following chapter will discuss the study’s methodology. Moreover, the methodology
will present the way in which the research will be conducted. The chapter will include an indepth explanation of the study’s design, participants, procedures, and statistical analyses.
22
CHAPTER III
METHODOLGY
Introduction
Although there are several studies regarding ethnic identity and self-esteem in children
and adolescents, there is very little research that focuses on the effectiveness of school-based
cultural awareness programs on ethnic identity and self-esteem. There is a major gap in our
knowledge of effective multicultural school counseling programming. Moreover, multiculturally
sensitive services are vital to school counseling as the student population is becoming more
diverse. The following section will discuss the design of the study, participants, instrumentation,
procedures, and data analysis.
Design of Study
The study involved the use of a quasi-experimental design and more specifically, a nonrandomized pre-test and post-test control group design (Creswell, 2009). In this design, there is
one experimental group and one control group. Both groups completed a pre-test before
treatment and post-test after the experimental group finishes treatment. The experimental group
participated in the cultural awareness program. The control group was not involved in the
cultural awareness program at that time. However, the control group will receive the treatment
after the research has been completed. The quasi-experimental design of this study intends to
determine the effectiveness of the cultural awareness program on students’ level of ethnic
identity and self-esteem. Respectively, students’ ethnic identity and self-esteem was
23
measured using the Multigroup Measure of Ethnic Identity (MEIM) and the Rosenberg Self
Esteem Inventory (Phinney, 1992; Rosenberg, 1965).
Participants
The target population for this study consists of inner-city early adolescents in a large
Southeastern city in the United States. More specifically, the researcher aimed to study fifth
grade students during the 2010-2011 academic year. The school and student sample was chosen
based on the diversity of its fifth grade demographics. Fifth grade was chosen in order to assess
students at the elementary level, but also students having the ability to understand and
comprehend the assessments and actively participate in the classroom guidance activities. Fifth
grade is often the final grade level within an elementary school.
A non-random sample of 100 students (approximately four classrooms) was recruited
from one elementary school (Germanshire Elementary) within an inner-city school system. The
participants included both male and female fifth grade students. Ethnic affiliation included
Caucasian, African-American, Latino, Asian American, American-Indian, and Bi-racial. Fifty
subjects participated in a cultural awareness program. The other 50 subjects served as the control
group. The school notified parents and obtained informed consent (see Appendices B and C), in
writing, and discussed issues of confidentiality with parents and the participants. The participants
were instructed verbally that they have a right to participate or not participate in the study. The
students assented by completing the assessments.
Procedures
First, the researcher obtained approval from the dissertation committee members and the
University’s Institutional Review Board, which includes approval by the participating school
24
district. Written confirmation from the authors of the Multigroup Measure of Ethnic Identity and
the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Inventory is not needed to make use of the items from the surveys.
Near the beginning of the school year, the school counselor selected the four most diverse
fifth grade classrooms and 106 of those students were chosen to participate. The school
counselor was sure to choose diverse classrooms that are comparable in demographics. A
diverse classroom is one that is made up of children with varying ethnicities. Demographics for
each classroom were obtained from the school in order to make this distinction. The school
counselor assigned two classrooms to serve as the experimental cultural awareness groups and
the remaining classrooms were assigned as the non-experimental control groups (Hinkle et al.,
2003). In order to be as fair as possible, the school counselor blindly pulled classroom names
from a box to determine which two classrooms served as the treatment group and which two
classrooms served as the control group. The school counselor distributed informed consent
documents to the fifth grade teachers who had students involved in the research study. The
teachers sent the informed consent documents home with the students. Parents of students from
the selected classrooms received notices from their child’s school describing a study about
cultural awareness and self-esteem. Interested parents returned an informed consent document
signed by both the parent and student. Once received, fifth grade teachers returned the informed
consent documents to the school counselor. The school counselor then gave the documents to
the principal researcher. If students did not return an informed consent document signed, they
were able to participate in the cultural awareness program, but did not take the aforementioned
inventories. Students were instructed verbally that they may or may not participate in the
program. An oral assent form was completed by the researcher for each participant (see
Appendix D).
25
Once all materials were obtained, the principal researcher numbered all informed consent
documents. The students’ inventories were numbered in a manner that corresponded to their
consent form. The principal researcher was the sole individual handling the inventories,
therefore, the students’ information was confidential and de-identified to all others.
Following recruitment, all groups of students were asked to complete the MEIM and
RSE, which will serve as pretests. Both groups spent one hour per week for six weeks
participating in classroom guidance programs. The experimental group participated in the
cultural awareness classroom guidance series and the control group participated in the Project
Wisdom classroom guidance series, the school’s character education program. Classroom
guidance is an efficient way for school counselors to deliver services to large groups. This
particular cultural awareness classroom guidance series was developed by the researcher. The
experimental group spent the first week getting to know one another and setting group goals.
During subsequent classroom guidance lessons the following topics were covered: all about me
and my unique family, personal heroes, music, our school culture, and discrimination in our
school/city (Washington et al., 2003). The school counselor was properly debriefed on each
topic and corresponding activity. In addition, a detailed resource packet was provided by the
researcher. The non-experimental control group did not receive cultural awareness classroom
guidance, but participated in the school’s Project Wisdom classroom guidance series. At the end
of the program, both groups of students were asked to complete the post-tests.
Instrumentation
Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure (see Appendix E for complete instrument). The
Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure was used to measure ―three aspects of ethnic identity:
positive ethnic attitudes and sense of belonging; ethnic identity achievement, including both
26
exploration and resolution of identity issues; and ethnic behaviors or practices‖ (Phinney, 1992,
p. 164). Because ethnic identity is recognized as an important part of development, the MEIM
was created to use with all young people. Fifteen items make up the questionnaire. Questions are
scored using a four-point scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree (1 = strongly
disagree; 4 = strongly agree). The mean of the 15 items is calculated in order to obtain an overall
score. The higher the overall score, the higher the overall ethnic identity. The MEIM has a
Chronbach alpha of 0.81 which suggests a high level of reliability for this instrument (Phinney,
1992).
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Inventory (see Appendix F for complete instrument). The
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Inventory consists of 10 items assessing individual feelings about self
(Rosenberg, 1965). Fisher, Wallace, and Fenton (2000) argued that this particular measure of
self-esteem could assist in the exploration of negative self-evaluations that may originate from
issues regarding race and ethnicity. Questions are scored using a four-point scale ranging from
strongly agree (SA) to strongly disagree (SD). When scoring the items, 3 = strongly agree and 0
= strongly disagree. Some items are scored in reverse order (0 = strongly agree; 3 = strongly
disagree). The RES has a Chronbach alpha of 0.77 which suggests a high level of reliability for
this instrument. Robins, Hendin, and Trzesniewski (2001) performed a study to measure the
construct validity of the RSE. The study included men, women and children, from varying
ethnic groups, in school, college and in the community. The authors found the construct validity
of the RSE to be between 0.72 and 0.76 across all populations involved in the study.
27
Specific Research Questions
This quantitative study was designed primarily to examine the influences of a schoolbased cultural awareness program on ethnic identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students. The
study addresses the following research questions:
1. Is there a relationship between self-esteem and ethnic identity in fifth grade students?
2. Is there a significant difference in mean self-esteem scores on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem
Scale for fifth grade students who have participated in a school-based cultural awareness
program when compared to fifth grade students who have not participated in a schoolbased cultural awareness program?
3. Is there a significant difference in mean ethnic identity scores on the Multigroup Ethnic
Identity Measure for fifth grade students who have participated in a school-based cultural
awareness program when compared to fifth grade students who have not participated in a
school-based cultural awareness program?
It is predicted that student involvement in a cultural awareness program will increase both ethnic
identity and self-esteem. It is also predicted that there is a relationship between ethnic identity
and self-esteem.
Hypotheses
The central research hypotheses most important to this study are presented in both the null and
alternate form and are as follows:
Ho1: There is insufficient evidence of a significant relationship between ethnic
 identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students.
Ha1: There is sufficient evidence of a significant relationship between ethnic
 identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students.
28
Ho2: There is insufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean self-esteem
 posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for pretest scores.
Ha2: There is sufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean self-esteem
 posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for pretest scores.
Ho3: There is insufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean ethnic
identity posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for
pretest scores.
Ha3: There is sufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean ethnic
identity posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for
pretest scores.
It is important to note that in hypothesis two and three the phrase ―method of instruction‖ refers
to the following: 1) participation in the school-based cultural awareness program, and 2) no
participation in the school-based cultural awareness program.
Statistical Tests and Data Analysis
For hypothesis one, a Pearson r correlation statistical analysis was used to analyze the
data. A Pearson r correlation is a ―mathematical expression of the direction and magnitude of
the relationship between two measures that yield continuous scores‖ (Gall, Gall, & Borg, 2007,
p. 649). The level of self-esteem as measured by the RSE served as the dependent variable and
the level of ethnic identity achievement as measured by the MEIM was the independent variable.
A Pearson r correlation assumes that the relationship between the dependent variable and the
independent variable will be linear (Hinkle et al., 2003). An independent and dependent variable
must be specified in a correlation even if the relationship is not believed to be causal. The
29
correlation ranges from +1.00 (perfect positive correlation) to –1.00 (perfect negative
correlation). A correlation of zero represents no relationship at all.
Hypothesis two was investigated using an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA).
ANCOVA are used to determine whether the mean differences of groups on the dependent
variable are statistically significant (Tabachnick & Fidell, 1996). More specifically, in a quasiexperimental design, the elemental purpose of an ANCOVA is to regulate the mean posttest
scores for differences that are likely to be present in intact groups. ANCOVA analyze one
independent variable, one dependent variable, and one or more covariates. In addition,
ANCOVA adjust for differences in the dependent variable in order to reduce error caused by the
relationship between the dependent variable and the covariate. This allows for all participants to
have an equal starting point. The independent variable is expected to have at least two levels.
The independent variable in this study is method of instruction. The two levels of method of
instruction are 1) participation in the school-based cultural awareness group, and 2) no
participation in the school-based cultural awareness group. The dependent variable is selfesteem posttest score as measured by the Rosenberg Self Esteem Inventory. The covariate is
self-esteem pretest score.
Furthermore, hypothesis three was also be examined using an ANCOVA. The
independent variable is method of instruction. The two levels of method of instruction are 1)
participation in the school-based cultural awareness group, and 2) no participation in the schoolbased cultural awareness group. The dependent variable is ethnic identity posttest score as
measured by the Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure. The covariate is ethnic identity pretest
score. For both hypothesis two and hypothesis three, the ANCOVA was used to determine
30
whether there is a significant difference in the sample means of the dependent variables among
the two groups.
Limitations
Selection bias is a concern in this study. The groups were chosen by the school
counselor. As a result, there is a possibility that the selection of the fifth grade classrooms was
biased.
Conclusion
This quantitative study was designed primarily to examine the influences of a schoolbased cultural awareness program on ethnic identity and self-esteem in fifth grade early
adolescents. The development and implementation of a school-based cultural awareness
program is intended to offer students a basic foundation for the development and/or enhancement
of ethnic identity and self-esteem. It is predicted that students having participated in the program
will show a significant increase in both ethnic identity and self-esteem. The following chapter
contains the results of the study.
31
CHAPTER IV
RESULTS
The purpose of this quantitative study was to examine the effectiveness of a school-based
cultural awareness program as a means to enhance ethnic identity and improve self-esteem in
fifth grade early adolescents. This study attempted to determine whether a difference existed
before and after the implementation of a cultural awareness program in students’ self-esteem and
ethnic identity. The instruments used to measure this difference were the Multigroup Ethnic
Identity Measure and the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale. The Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure
provided information concerning the students’ ethnicity and the ethnicity of their parents. This
measure also has subscales that will be mentioned later in the discussion section, chapter five. A
score ranging from 1-4 was used to measure ethnic identity. Regarding the Rosenberg SelfEsteem Scale, a score ranging from 0-40 was used to measure self-esteem.
Data Examination and Management
Before the data was analyzed, it was properly screened and checked for possible errors or
missing data. Although there were a few instances in which data was missing, all the participants
information was able to be used. Participants in this study were composed of fifth grade students
from a public elementary school in the southwestern part of the United States. Participation in
this study was dependent upon the return of a parental permission form. The number of
participants in this study totaled 106.
32
Assumptions and Related Statistical Concerns
Before reporting the results, the statistical analyses performed will be discussed. The
Pearson product moment correlation coefficient (Pearson r), the univariate analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA), the univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA), and the multivariate analysis of
variance, repeated measures (MANOVA, repeated measures) were used to analyze the data.
First, a Pearson r correlation statistical analysis will be used to analyze the data. A
Pearson r correlation is a ―mathematical expression of the direction and magnitude of the
relationship between two measures that yield continuous scores‖ (Gall, Gall, & Borg, 2007, p.
649). The level of self-esteem as measured by the RSE will serve as the dependent variable and
the level of ethnic identity achievement as measured by the MEIM will be the independent
variable. A Pearson r correlation assumes that the relationship between the dependent variable
and the independent variable will be linear (Hinkle et al., 2003). An independent and dependent
variable must be specified in a correlation even if the relationship is not believed to be causal.
The correlation ranges from +1.00 (perfect positive correlation) to –1.00 (perfect negative
correlation). A correlation of zero represents no relationship at all. For the purpose of this study,
the correlation coefficient will be calculated to examine the relationship between scores on
ethnic identity as measured by the Multi-Group Ethnic Identity Measure and self-esteem as
measured by the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale.
The second statistical analysis conducted in this study was a univariate analysis of
covariance or ANCOVA. An ANCOVA is used to determine whether the mean differences of
groups on the dependent variable are statistically significant (Tabachnick & Fidell, 1996). More
specifically, in a quasi-experimental design, the elemental purpose of an ANCOVA is to regulate
the mean posttest scores for differences that are likely to be present in intact groups. An
33
ANCOVA analyzes one independent variable, one dependent variable, and one or more
covariates. In addition, An ANCOVA adjusts for differences in the dependent variable in order
to reduce error caused by the relationship between the dependent variable and the covariate.
This allows for all participants to have an equal starting point. The independent variable is
expected to have at least two levels. More specifically speaking, the independent variable is
expected to be categorized into at least two groups. There are several underlying assumptions
associated with the ANCOVA. Some of which include randomness, independence, normality,
and homogeneity of variance. In addition, there are three very unique assumptions associated
with the ANCOVA and are as follows: a) the independent variable should not affect the
covariate variable, b) homogeneity of within-group correlations, and c) linearity (Tabachnik &
Fidell, 2001). These unique assumptions will be discussed first and the more common
assumptions will follow.
The first of the three unique assumptions specifies that the independent variable should
not influence the covariate (Tabachnik & Fidell, 2001). If the data is collected before treatment,
then this assumption will be met. The second unique assumption requires that the correlation
between the dependent variables and the covariate be equal within each population included in
the study. The last unique assumption, linearity, requires a linear relationship between the
covariate and the dependent variables. A statistical test exists that computes linearity, but is not
often discussed in research.
The first of the more common assumptions, randomness, refers to a methodological
concern. The sample should be a random subset of the population it represents (Huck, 2000).
Independence is also a methodological concern. This refers to an independence of observation,
34
meaning the score of any given participant should not be affected by any other participant in the
study.
The third assumption, normality, assumes that the data were sampled from a population
having a normal distribution (Huck, 2000). In other words, the dependent variable should be
normally distributed which means there should be an equal number of participants with scores
both above and below the mean. More commonly, the participants scores should be closer to the
mean rather than very different from the mean. The fourth assumption, homogeneity of variance,
assumes that the population variances among the dependent variables are the same across all
groups. The variance associated with each mean should be equal. If the groups’ covariance is
unequal the results of the ANCOVA are questionable.
The first two assumptions, randomness and independence, are rarely discussed by
researchers in their reports. However, normality and homogeneity of variance are often discussed
(Huck, 2000). PASW Statistics 18 (2010) is able to measure normality and homogeneity of
variance using Levene’s test of equality of error variances. This test works by computing the
absolute difference between each value in its group mean. When normality or homogeneity of
variance assumptions are violated it is serious and an ANCOVA should not be performed. The
homogeneity of variance assumption was violated in this study. Levene’s test of equality of error
variances reported F(1, 104) = 8.852, p = 0.004. This significance level is less than the alpha
significance level of 0.05, and is, therefore, significant.
As a means to compensate for the lack of homogeneity of variance other test procedures
were performed. With an awareness that the assumption of homogeneity of variance was not
met, an analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to analyze the data in order to determine preexisting differences between groups. In its simplest form, an ANOVA provides a statistical test
35
of whether or not the means of several groups are all equal (Tabachnik & Fidell, 2001). Because
conducting multiple t-tests would result in an increased chance of committing a Type I error, an
ANOVA was used to reduce this possibility. For this reason, an ANOVA is helpful in comparing
two, three, or more means (Huck, 2000).
In this study, the ANOVA indicated there was an overall significant difference between
groups on self-esteem. Levene’s test of equality of error variances reported
F(1, 104) = 8.062, p = 0.005 for the groups based on the self-esteem variable. However, there
was no significant difference between groups based on the ethnic identity variable. For ethnic
identity, Levene’s test of equality of error variances reported F(1, 104) = 0.751, p = 0.388. After
having discovered the pre-existing differences between groups on self-esteem, a repeated
measures MANOVA was conducted because this particular statistical analyses provides
numerous tests of significance that can validate the findings of the study. In order to answer the
hypotheses, a repeated measures ANOVA could have been used, however a repeated measures
MANOVA was used to explore a variety of statistical results.
A more detailed explanation of the repeated measures MANOVA will be provided
because it is this statistical procedure by which two of the hypotheses will be explained. In
addition, it was earlier stated that an ANCOVA was the original statistical analysis to be used
and this analysis was explained in the methods section of this dissertation. Repeated measures
MANOVA was not discussed in the methods section, therefore will be explained in detail here.
 A repeated measures design refers to studies in which the same measures are collected
multiple times for each subject but under different conditions (Hinkle et al.). This is a powerful
and efficient design because it reduces error variance (Weinfurt, 1995). For this study in
particular, repeated measures were collected before and after the sampled population
36
participated in a classroom guidance series. Half of the students participated in a cultural
awareness program while the other half of the students participated in a character education
program. Both groups of students were given the same measures before and after the programs.
Measurements that occur over a period of time, like in an analysis such as this, attempt to show
change over that period of time. Main and interaction effects are meant to be revealed when
using a repeated measures MANOVA.
Some important terms associated with repeated measures MANOVA include (a)
within-subjects variable, which refers to the independent variable, and (b) between-subjects
variable, which refers to the grouping variable (Weinfurt, 1995). There are several assumptions
that underlie the repeated measures MANOVA. The first assumption, independence, means
that the observations of participants at each measurement period are independent. Another
assumption, normality, declares that population sample is normally distributed. The third
assumption, homogeneity of variance, refers to the equality of the variances of the dependent
variable at level of measurement. Lastly, repeated measures MANOVA assume that time
periods are equal between measurements.
Multivariate tests of significance for a repeated measures MANOVA include Pillai’s
Trace, Wilks’ Lambda, Hotelling’s Trace, and Roy’s Largest Root. Pillai’s test has the most
statistical power and is the most vigorous. However, Wilks’ Lamba is most often reported
when testing significance (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2006). These tests specify whether there is a
significant difference on the dependent variable and whether it can be classified as a main or
interaction effect.
37
In order to test for equality of variance, Mauchly’s test of sphericity is commonly
utilized.
The sphericity assumption says that the population variances associated with the levels
of the repeated measures factor, in combination with the population correlations between
pairs of levels, must represent one of a set of acceptable patterns. One of the acceptable
patterns is for all the population variances to be identical and for all bivariate correlations
to be identical. There are, however, other patterns of variances and correlations that
adhere to the requirements of sphericity (Huck, 2000, p. 477)
Because there are only two groups in this study, Mauchly’s test of sphericity was unable to
compute. However, Epsilon adjustments can be made to compensate for the lack of this test.
Epsilon adjustments presume the sphericity assumption has been violated. As a result, these
adjustments modify the degrees of freedom values (dfs) to more appropriate ones in order to
determine the critical F value used to assess the computed F value (Huck 2000). GreenhouseGeisser is the most traditional Epsilon adjustment and is referred to in the data analysis section of
this report. Once these adjustments are made, main and/or interaction effects may show a
significant difference. After which, more post hoc analyses are necessary to deem a result as
significant. For example, in this particular study, the Bonferrroni post hoc analysis was
conducted.
Data Analysis
The following section will restate the research questions and hypotheses. A presentation
of the results will follow. Demographic information is presented below in Tables 1, 2, and 3.
38
Table 1
Participant Ethnicity
Group Frequency Percentage
Control Asian 2 3.4
African American 43 74.1
Hispanic 3 5.2
Caucasian 1 1.7
American Indian 1 1.7
Biracial 7 12.1
Other 1 1.7
Total 58 100
Experimental African American 40 83.3
Hispanic 4 8.3
Caucasian 1 2.1
Biracial 2 4.2
Other 1 2.1
Total 48 100
39
Table 2
Father Ethnicity
Group Frequency Percentage
Control Asian 1 1.7
African American 46 79.3
Hispanic 3 5.2
Caucasian 1 1.7
American Indian 1 1.7
Biracial 4 6.9
Other 2 3.4
Total 58 100
Experimental African American 36 75
Hispanic 4 8.3
Caucasian 1 2.1
Biracial 4 8.3
Other 3 6.3
Total 48 100
40
Table 3
Mother Ethnicity
Group Frequency Percentage
Control Asian 1 1.7
African American 47 81
Hispanic 3 5.2
Caucasian 2 3.4
American Indian 3 5.2
Biracial 2 3.4
Total 58 100
Experimental Asian 1 2.1
African American 39 81.3
Hispanic 5 10.4
Caucasian 1 2.1
Biracial 1 2.1
Other 1 2.1
Total 48 100
41
The overarching research question is as follows: What effect does a school-based cultural
awareness program have on students’ ethnic identity and self-esteem? The study addresses the
following secondary research questions:
1. Is there a relationship between self-esteem and ethnic identity in fifth grade students?
2. Is there a significant difference in mean self-esteem pretest and posttest scores on the
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale for fifth grade students who have participated in a schoolbased cultural awareness program when compared to fifth grade students who have not
participated in a school-based cultural awareness program?
3. Is there a significant difference in mean ethnic identity pretest and posttest scores on the
Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure for fifth grade students who have participated in a
school-based cultural awareness program when compared to fifth grade students who
have not participated in a school-based cultural awareness program?
It is predicted that student involvement in a cultural awareness program will show an increased
level of ethnic identity and level of self-esteem.
There are three major hypotheses that were the subject of this data analysis. The central
research hypotheses most important to this study are presented in both the null and alternate form
and are as follows:
Ho1: There is insufficient evidence of a significant relationship between ethnic
 identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students.
Ha1: There is sufficient evidence of a significant relationship between ethnic
 identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students.
Ho2: There is insufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean self-esteem
 posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for pretest scores.
42
Ha2: There is sufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean self-esteem
 posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for pretest scores.
Ho3: There is insufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean ethnic
identity posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for
pretest scores.
Ha3: There is sufficient evidence of a significant difference in mean ethnic
identity posttest scores by method of instruction when controlling for
pretest scores.
It is important to note that in hypotheses two and three the phrase ―method of instruction‖ refers
to the following: 1) participation in the school-based cultural awareness program, and 2) no
participation in the school-based cultural awareness program. The following section presents the
results of the data analysis as it relates to each of the three hypotheses.
Hypothesis One. The first hypothesis predicted that there would be a significant
correlation between ethnic identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students having participated in
a cultural awareness program. A Pearson r correlation statistical analysis was used to analyze the
data. Self-esteem served as the dependent variable and ethnic identity served as the independent
variable. Two Pearson r correlations were used to determine the relationship between the two
variables on both the pretest and posttest. The first correlation between the scores on the ethnic
identity pretest and the self-esteem pretest were moderately correlated at r = 0.329. This means
there is a significant relationship between ethnic identity and self-esteem. The level of
significance reported was p = 0.001. For the correlation to be statistically significant, the
significance level needs to be less than 0.01, the alpha significance level. Therefore, this
particular correlation is statistically significant.
43
The second correlation between the scores on the ethnic identity posttest and the selfesteem posttest were moderately correlated as well at r = 0.381. The results indicate that there is
a positive relationship between ethnic identity and self-esteem. As ethnic identity increased, so
did self-esteem. Furthermore, the results suggest an important relationship between ethnic
identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students after participation in a school-based cultural
awareness program. The reported significance level for this correlation was p = 0.000 which is
less than 0.01, therefore the relationship between the variables is statistically significant.
Table 4
Pearson r Correlations between the ethnic identity and self-esteem pretests and posttests
Pretest and Posttest Correlation Results
r Significance level (p)
Ethnic Identity/
Self-Esteem Pretests 0.329 0.001*
Ethnic Identity
Self-Esteem Posttests 0.381 0.000*
* Level of significance p<0.01
In summary, through analysis of scores of both the ethnic identity and self-esteem
pretests and posttests, it was discovered that there are significant relationships between the two
variables.
Hypothesis Two. The second hypothesis predicted that there would be a significant
difference in the self-esteem posttest scores when controlling for the pretest scores. Because it
was found that the homogeneity of variance assumption associated with an ANCOVA was
violated (based on the difference between the self-esteem dependent variable by group), this
44
hypothesis will be tested using the repeated measures MANOVA statistical method. Repeated
measures MANOVA can be used to describe a difference in groups before and after treatment.
The major purpose of this study is to determine whether or not the participation in a school-based
cultural awareness program makes a difference in the ethnic identity and self-esteem of fifth
grade students. According to this particular research hypothesis, it is predicted that there is a
significant difference between students’ self-esteem scores before and after treatment. See Table
5 for item content used to determine the self-esteem pretest and posttest scores.
Table 5
Item Content for Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale
Item Item Content
1 On the whole I am satisfied with myself.
2 At times I think that I am no good at all.
3 I feel that I have a number of good qualities.
4 I am able to do things as well as most other people.
5 I feel I do not have much to be proud of.
6 I certainly feel useless at times.
7 I feel that I am a person of worth, at least the equal of others.
8 I wish I could have more respect for myself.
9 All in all, I am inclined to feel that I am a failure.
10 I take a positive attitude toward myself.
45
There were several multivariate tests performed to understand the difference in the level
of self-esteem in fifth grade students. At times, the level of self-esteem was measured by group.
The dependent variable in this analysis is self-esteem. The independent variable is the method of
instruction (group), which refers to participation in a cultural awareness program (experimental
group) or a character education program (control group). For the purpose of the study, the
independent variable was coded as two groups: group 0 (control group) and group 1
(experimental group).
First, the descriptive statistics showed that there was an increase in the students’ selfesteem after having participated in the program. The mean score reported at the time of the
pretest was 33.17. The mean score reported at the time of the posttest was 35.21. The mean score
for the self-esteem of fifth grade students who have participated in a school-based cultural
awareness program increased by 2.04. The highest score possible on the Rosenberg self-esteem
scale is 40. The mean scores and standard deviations for both groups is shown below in Table 6.
Table 6
Mean scores and standard deviations on the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale
Group Mean SD
RSE Pretest 0 31.19 5.552
1 33.17 3.991
RSE Posttest 0 31.78 6.232
1 35.21 3.010
46
Box's tests of equality of covariance matrices was another test performed during the
repeated measures MANOVA statistical analysis. Box’s M = 40.931, F(10, 47663.534) = 3.921,
p = 0.000. Box’s M is significant, which means there are violated assumptions. This indicates
that there are unequal variances across the groups. This is similar to the violated assumptions
reported by Levene’s test of equality of error variances within the ANCOVA results discussed
earlier. However, there are other tests performed in the repeated measures MANOVA data
analysis that ensure the significance of the results. These tests will be discussed in the following
section.
The repeated measures MANOVA revealed that the difference between the self-esteem
scores on the pretest and the self-esteem scores on the posttest is significant, with Wilks’
Lambda = 0.902, F(1, 104) = 11.310, p = 0.001. The main effect of self-esteem as determined by
group was reported using Wilks’ Lambda as well with Wilks’ Lambda = 0.967, F(1, 104) =
3.537, p = 0.063. There is no significant difference in the self-esteem pretests and posttest scores
by group.
Mauchly's test of sphericity was unable to compute due to the fact that there are only two
groups in the study. As a routine part of the analysis, tests of within subject main effects were
conducted. For this research study the Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment will be mentioned. The F
value, its degrees of freedom, and significance level will be reported. Based on the significance
level it will be determined whether or not the main effect is significant. The Greenhouse-Geisser
adjustment is to be considered in addition to the Wilks’ Lambda values. The Greenhouse -
Geisser adjustment continued to show a significant difference between self-esteem pretest scores
and self-esteem posttest scores at F(1.000) = 11.310, p = 0.001. The main effect of self-esteem as
47
determined by group revealed no significance, with the Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment at
F(1.000) = 3.537, p = 0.063.
Next, paired sample t-tests were utilized to determine the difference between groups on
self-esteem before and after participation in the cultural awareness program. The paired sample ttests reported p = 0.001, which is significant. Finally, the Bonferroni adjustment technique
(Huck, 2000) was applied to paired sample t-tests and used to determine significant differences.
Paired sample t-tests (with a Bonferroni adjustment; p<0.05) revealed that the results reported for
self esteem remain significant. The paired sample t-tests with a Bonferroni adjustment reported p
= 0.001.
In summary, through the analysis of self-esteem as reported by the Rosenberg SelfEsteem Scale using the repeated measures MANOVA, it was discovered that there is a
significant difference in self-esteem after participation in a school-based cultural awareness
program in fifth grade students.
Hypothesis Three. The third hypothesis predicted that there would be a significant
difference in the ethnic identity posttest scores when controlling for the pretest scores. The
previous hypothesis was tested using a repeated measures MANOVA because it was found that
the homogeneity of variance assumption associated with an ANCOVA was violated regarding
the self-esteem dependent variable. In order to establish continuity, a repeated measures
MANOVA will be utilized to test this hypothesis as well. However, it should be noted that the
ethnic identity dependent variable did not violate the homogeneity of variance assumption.
According to this particular research hypothesis, it is predicted that there is a significant
difference between students’ ethnic identity scores before and after treatment. See Table 7 for
item content used to determine the ethnic identity pretest and posttest scores.
48
Table 7
Item Content for Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure
Item Item Content
1 I have spent time trying to find out more about my ethnic group, such as
its history, traditions, and customs.
2 I am active in organizations or social groups that include mostly members
of my own ethnic group.
3 I have a clear sense of my ethnic background and what it means for me.
4 I think a lot about how my life will be affected by my ethnic group membership.
5 I am happy that I am a member of the group I belong to.
6 I have a strong sense of belonging to my own ethnic group.
7 I understand pretty well what my ethnic group membership means to me.
8 In order to learn more about my ethnic background, I have often talked
to other people about my ethnic group.
9 I have a lot of pride in my ethnic group.
10 I participate in cultural practices of my own group, such as special food,
music, or customs.
11 I feel a strong attachment towards my own ethnic group.
12 I feel good about my cultural or ethnic background.
13 My ethnicity is
(1) Asian or Asian American, including Chinese, Japanese, and others
(2) Black or African American
49
(3) Hispanic or Latino, including Mexican American, Central American, and
 others
(4) White, Caucasian, Anglo, European American; not Hispanic
(5) American Indian/Native American
(6) Mixed; Parents are from two different groups
(7) Other (write in): _____________________________________
14 My father's ethnicity is (use numbers above)
15 My mother's ethnicity is (use numbers above)
There were several multivariate tests performed to understand the difference in the level
of ethnic identity in fifth grade students. At times, the level of ethnic identity was measured by
group. The dependent variable in this analysis is ethnic identity. The independent variable is the
method of instruction (group), which refers to participation in a cultural awareness program
(experimental group) or a character education program (control group). For the purpose of the
study, the independent variable was coded as two groups: group 0 (control group) and group 1
(experimental group).
First, the descriptive statistics showed that there was an increase in the students’ ethnic
identity after having participated in the program. The mean score reported at the time of the
pretest was 3.25. The mean score reported at the time of the posttest was 3.47. The mean score
for the level of ethnic identity of fifth grade students who have participated in a school-based
cultural awareness program increased by 0.22. The highest score possible on the Multigroup
Ethnic Identity Measure is 4. The mean scores and standard deviations for ethnic identity for
both groups is shown in the table below.
50
Table 8
Mean scores and standard deviations on the Multigroup Ethnic Identity Measure
Group Mean SD
MEIM Pretest 0 3.1667 0.43287
1 3.2535 0.39311
MEIM Posttest 0 3.2184 0.42573
1 3.4688 0.37134
Box's tests of equality of covariance matrices was another test performed during the
repeated measures MANOVA statistical analysis. Box’s M = 40.931, F(10, 47663.534) = 3.921,
p = 0000. Box’s M is significant, which means there are violated assumptions. This indicates that
there are unequal variances across the groups. It was found (by Levene’s test of error variances
as reported by the ANOVA conducted) that the unequal variances across groups were related to
the self-esteem variable and not the ethnic identity variable. Nonetheless, there are other tests
performed in the repeated measures MANOVA data analysis that ensure the significance of the
results. These tests will be discussed in the following section.
The Wilks’ Lambda test of significance revealed information about the level of ethnic
identity after treatment as well as the main effect of ethnic identity as determined by group. With
Wilks’ Lambda =0.21, F(1, 104) = 4782.643, p = 0.000, the difference between the ethnic
identity scores on the pretest and the ethnic identity scores on the posttest is significant. The
main effect of ethnic identity and group was reported using Wilks’ Lambda as well. With Wilks’
51
Lambda = 0.922, F(1, 104) = 8.802, p = 0.004, there is a significant difference in the ethnic
identity pretests and posttest scores as determined by group.
Mauchly's test of sphericity was unable to compute due to the fact that there are only two
groups in the study. Still, as a routine part of the analysis, tests of within-subject effects were
conducted. For the ethnic identity dependent variable, the Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment will
be mentioned to further indicate the significance of the within-subject main effects of the level of
ethnic identity and ethnic identity as determined by group. The F value, its degrees of freedom,
and the significance level will be reported. Based on the significance level it will be determined
whether or not the main effect is significant. The Greenhouse-Geisser interaction effect is to be
considered in addition to the Wilks’ Lambda values. The Greenhouse-Geisser adjustment
reported F(1.000) = 4782.643, p = 0.000, which indicates there is a significant difference
between ethnic identity pretest scores and ethnic identity posttest scores. For ethnic identity as
determined by group, Greenhouse-Geisser reported F(1.000) = 8.802, p = 0.000. Therefore, the
main effect of ethnic identity as determined by group is significant.
Next, paired sample t-tests were utilized to determine the difference between groups on
ethnic identity before and after participation in the cultural awareness program. The paired
sample t-tests reported p = 0.000, which is significant. Finally, the Bonferroni adjustment
technique (Huck, 2000) was applied to paired sample t-tests and used to determine significant
differences. Paired sample t-tests (with a Bonferroni adjustment; p<0.05) revealed that the results
reported for ethnic identity remain significant. The paired sample t-tests used to calculate the
Bonferroni adjustment reported p = 0.000.
In summary, through the analysis of ethnic identity as reported by the Multigroup Ethnic
Identity Measure using the repeated measures MANOVA, it was discovered that there is a
52
significant difference in ethnic identity after participation in a school-based cultural awareness
program in fifth grade students.
Summary
Through analyses of the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale and the Multigroup Ethnic Identity
Measure, it was discovered that there is a relationship between ethnic identity and self-esteem.
Also, there is a significant difference between self-esteem and ethnic identity pretest scores and
self-esteem and ethnic identity posttest scores in fifth grade students who have participated in a
cultural awareness program.
53
CHAPTER V
DISCUSSION
Overview
The purpose of this quantitative study was to examine the effectiveness of a school-based
cultural awareness program as a means to enhance ethnic identity and improve self-esteem in
fifth grade early adolescents. It is believed that a lack of cultural awareness or cultural
recognition equates to a lack of basic essentials for the development of self-esteem (Roth, 2005).
Furthermore, ignoring individual and unique differences denies a central part of a person. Ethnic
individuality needs to be recognized as a key element in the overall success of a person. More
specifically speaking, it is believed that enhanced ethnic identity leads to a higher self-esteem
which leads to higher academic achievement (Chappell & Overton, 2002; Cokely & Chapman,
2008; Phinney, 1992; Okwumabua et al., 1999; Umaña-Taylor & Updegraff, 2007). Because
there is little research on programs for youth that focus on cultural awareness, this study was
intended to explore and confirm the significance of cultural awareness. Moreover, the number of
minority youth in America is increasing at a staggering rate and cultural awareness as well as
sensitivity must also increase. School counselors are charged with the duty to attend to students’
differences while appreciating them all at the same time.
Connections Between Hypotheses and Obtained Findings
The relationship between ethnic identity and self-esteem was investigated in this study.
The Pearson product moment correlation coefficient was used to determine this relationship.
54
The effectiveness of a school-based cultural awareness program on students’ scores on ethnic
identity and self-esteem pretests and posttests was also investigated. A repeated measures
multivariate analysis of variance (repeated measures MANOVA) was used to determine this
effectiveness.
The first hypothesis predicted that there would be no significant relationship between
ethnic identity and self-esteem in fifth grade students. It was expected that there would be a
positively correlated relationship between ethnic identity and self-esteem. Furthermore, it is
believed that as ethnic identity increases, self-esteem increases as well. Based on the results, it
was found that ethnic identity and self-esteem were moderately, yet positively correlated and
statistically significant on both the pretests and posttests. It is important to note that the Pearson
product moment correlation coefficient increased in both ethnic identity and self-esteem after
students’ participation in the cultural awareness program.
The results of this study confirm the assumptions of previous literature that suggest the
higher the ethnic identity of children, the higher their self-esteem (Alvarez & Helms, 2001;
Holcomb-McCoy, 2005; Phinney et al.; Smith et al., 2009). Holcomb-McCoy (2005) and
Phinney et al. stressed the significant relationship between positive identification with one’s
ethnic group and positive self-esteem. It appears that a sense of belonging, in particular, is
essential to the self-esteem of children.
Those children with strong feelings of belonging and high levels of ethnic identity are
often the same children cognizant of discrimination and racism. Even still, children’s selfesteem remains in tact because they have more effective ways of dealing with such issues
(Holcomb-McCoy, 2005). It can be inferred that children in healthy relationships are well
adjusted and equipped with the tools needed to handle everyday-life issues. This statement lends
55
to the idea that a child with high ethnic identity is likely to have high self-esteem, which leads to
more favorable outcomes including, but not limited to, academic success.
Hypothesis two predicted that there would be no differences between the control and
experimental groups’ self-esteem posttest scores. Originally, an analysis of covariance
(ANCOVA) was utilized to interpret the data. However, it is important to note that the
homogeneity of variance assumption was violated as it relates to the self-esteem dependent
variable. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was then used to determine the pre-existing
differences. The results of the ANOVA discovered there were pre-existing differences between
the groups on self-esteem at the start of the study.
Possible reasons for the differences between groups at the start of the study will now be
discussed. First, the fact that the classrooms were already intact groups may be a reason the
homogeneity of variance assumption was violated. Some of the classroom teachers may focus
on enhancing the self-esteem of their students more than other teachers (i.e. through self-esteem
building activities, incorporations in their lesson plans, reward programs, etc.). Another possible
explanation for this violation might be the type of classroom teacher involved. One teacher
might be very strict and disrespectful of children while another teacher is more lenient and
confident in the abilities of her students. This may be a factor because the treatment of the
children could manifest through the way they feel about themselves (either good or bad),
therefore affecting their level of self-esteem. Third and last, the collection of students in each
classroom could affect the homogeneity of variance assumption. For instance, one of the
classrooms had at least ten CLUE students. CLUE students are those children who are
considered gifted and excel academically. It is believed that children who are academically
successful have a higher self-esteem achievement (Chappell & Overton, 2002; Cokely &
56
Chapman, 2008; Phinney, 1992; Okwumabua et al., 1999; Umaña-Taylor & Updegraff, 2007).
On the other hand, another classroom had only one accelerated student, but had three to four ESL
(English as a second language) students and three to four resource (a division of special
education) students. This might prove to be a stark difference in the classroom’s level of selfesteem. With that being said, the results of the research findings will now be discussed.
In the end, the data was analyzed using a repeated measures multivariate analysis of
variance (repeated measures MANOVA) for hypothesis two. A repeated measures MANOVA
was used because it presents several statistical tests that can further validate the results of the
study. The repeated measures MANOVA indicated there was a significant difference between
self-esteem pretest scores and self-esteem posttest scores after fifth grade students participated in
a cultural awareness program. Even more, the results indicated a significant difference in
students’ self-esteem scores as determined by group. This means there is a difference between
the control and experimental group that is statistically significant on the self-esteem dependent
variable. The experimental group had significantly higher scores on the self-esteem posttest than
the control group. This result directly supports the expectation that gaining more knowledge
about cultural awareness may increase self-esteem. These findings also support previous
research.
According to Connolly and Hosken (2006), students began to realize their individual worth after
having participated in a cultural awareness program. Okwumabua et al. (1999) also suggested a
need for culturally relevant programs that help young people develop a more positive disposition
and attitude towards their own culture.
The third hypothesis predicted that there would be no differences between the control and
experimental groups’ ethnic identity posttest scores. There was no violation of the homogeneity
57
of variance assumption on the ethnic identity dependent variable, so the results of the statistical
analysis will now be discussed. A repeated measures MANOVA was used to analyze the data.
The data revealed a substantial increase in the mean scores presented at the time of the posttest.
In addition, it was found that there is a statistically significant difference between ethnic identity
pretest scores and ethnic identity posttest scores. The repeated measures MANOVA also
indicated a significant difference in ethnic identity pretest scores and ethnic identity posttest
scores as determined by group. These results are in line with previous literature on the subject.
Whitehead et al. (2009) found that it is imperative for children to explore their ethnicity first in
order to find security in that identity. Once children have explored and found meaning in their
ethnicity, they can then develop a connection with their ethnic group, which brings about
positive feelings for that group and other groups.
Additional Research Findings
The repeated measures MANOVA also indicated a significant interaction effect between
ethnic identity and self esteem on both dependent variables. This supports the initial Pearson r
correlation that suggests there is a positively correlated and statistically significant relationship
between ethnic identity and self-esteem. In a research study, Phinney (1989) found that
adolescents experience a period in which the need to deal with their ethnicity is apparent.
However, those adolescents that had explored and understood the meaning of their ethnicity
presented with higher scores on self-esteem, social and familial interactions, and sense of
accomplishment. This conclusion suggests a connection to one’s ethnicity is central to one’s
self-esteem.
58
Implications for School Counselors
The discussion of the research findings leads to recommendations for school counselors.
Considering the American School Counselor Association and its national model, school
counselors are expected to put some emphasis on recognizing and appreciating cultural diversity
(American School Counselor Association, 2008). It seems important that school counselors
include programs that enhance ethnic identity into their comprehensive guidance and counseling
programs. However, school counselors must first realize that ethnic identity development is
crucial to the emotional and academic success of children.
Umana-Taylor et al. (2009) suggested that ethnic identity is a process beginning with
exploration and ending with understanding. With this in mind, it is important for school
counselors to facilitate activities that elicit exploration, clarification, and examination of ethnic
issues. Activities might include classroom guidance lessons or small group discussions. School
counselors could develop and implement classroom guidance activities in which students explore
the uniqueness of their culture and the culture of others. Exploration activities can lead to
students realizing commonalities as well as appreciating differences among themselves and
others. For this study the researcher developed a six week cultural awareness program. As an
additional reference, topic areas and corresponding activities are listed below.
Week 1: Getting To Know One Another & Setting Group Goals
ACTIVITY: We’re All Unique (ICEBREAKER)
Week 2: All About Me & My Unique Family
ACTIVITY: Cultural Collage
Week 3: Personal Heroes
ACTIVITY: Who Inspires You?
59
Week 4: Music
ACTIVITY: Music and Dance
Week 5: Our School Culture
ACTIVITY: School Culture Sand Tray
Week 6: Discrimination in Our School/City
ACTIVITY: Barnga
Follow-Up: Suggestion Box
These activities are appropriate for upper elementary and middle school students. Also, these are
the same activities used in this study. For descriptions of each activity refer to Appendix A.
It is important to note that not only should minority students participate in ethnic identity
exploration, but Caucasian students should be included as well. Phinney (1989) found that
Caucasian adolescents deemed their ethnicities as synonymous with American culture. This
revealed a deficiency in pluralistic ethnocentrism among this group of young people. Moreover,
it was discovered that this group of adolescents considered American culture to be centrally
important in a society that is made up of diverse members that value their traditional culture as
most significant. Therefore, school counselors should provide safe, respectful environments
where students of all races and ethnicities feel comfortable expressing different opinions. All
students opinions should be valued and sometimes challenged, but in a respectful manner.
School counselors should also encourage Caucasian students to participate in ethnic awareness
activities to explore their heritage. For example, Caucasian students could research their
family’s migration to the United States or family rituals. Students might explore what holidays
they celebrate and how they celebrate them
