This study is the first to examine the effectiveness of the Fun FRIENDS program, a
school-based, universal preventive intervention for early childhood anxiety and
promotion of resilience delivered by classroom teachers. Participants (N= 488)
included children aged 4-7 years attending 1 of 14 Catholic Education schools in
Brisbane, Australia. The schools were randomly allocated to one of three groups, the
intervention, active comparison and waitlist control group. Parents completed
standardised measures of anxiety and behavioural inhibition, resilience, social and
emotional functioning and behaviour difficulties in addition to parental stress and
anxiety, at pre- and post- and 12-month follow up. Teachers also completed a parallel
measure of social and emotional strength at the three time points. Comparable results
were obtained for the intervention and comparison groups; however the intervention
group achieved greater reductions in behavioural inhibition, child behavioural
difficulties and improvements in social and emotional competence. In addition
significant improvements in parenting distress and parent-child interactions were
found for the intervention group, with gains were maintained at 12-month follow-up.
Teacher reports revealed more significant improvement in social and emotional
competence for the intervention group. Clinical implications of the findings are
discussed, along with limitations and directions for future research.
Key Words: child, anxiety, prevention, early intervention, universal
3
Introduction
Anxiety disorders are among the most prevalent psychiatric disorders in children and
adolescents (Costello et al., 2003; Hirshfeld-Becker, Micco, Mazursky, Bruett &
Henin, 2011; Kessler et al., 2005). The prevalence of anxiety disorders in a
community sample of preschool aged children (2 – 5 years) has been reported as 9.5%
(Edwards, Rapee, Kennedy, & Spence, 2010; Egger & Angold, 2006), with up to
28.8% of children developing an anxiety disorder during their lifetime (Kessler et al.,
2005; Merikangas et al., 2010). If untreated, anxiety has the potential to cause
significant disruption to a child’s developmental trajectory due to the chronic course
and low rates of remission (McLoone, Hudson, & Rapee, 2006). Further, childhood
anxiety may fail to be recognised as many anxious children present as shy,
cooperative or compliant within the school setting (Albano, Chorpita, & Barlow,
2003). However young children (under the age of 8 years) presenting with anxiety
sympotomology have only recently been included in intervention studies (Van der
Sluis et al., 2012). Regardless of the limited research focus, results have been
promising in terms of the potential benefits of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
based interventions for young anxious children (Cartwright-Hatton et al., 2011;
Hirshfeld-Becker et al., 2008; 2010; Kennedy et al., 2009; Monga et al., 2009; Pincus
et al., 2008; Rapee et al., 2005; van der Sluis et al., 2012; Waters et al., 2009).
The majority of children with anxiety disorders do not receive appropriate
intervention (Hirschfeld et al, 1997; Merikangas et al., 2010; Olfson et al, 2003;
Sawyer et al, 2000). Research indicates that as many as 80% of children and
adolescents in need of mental health services fail to receive such intervention
(Cobham, 2012; Essau, 2005). A number of barriers to accessing psychological
intervention exist including cost, time, availability, commitment, and location
particularly for families living in rural areas (Barrett & Pahl, 2006; Jorm & Wright,
2007). Many children presenting with anxiety suffer for years before receiving help
(Thompson, Hunt & Issakidis, 2004), with the average delay between symptom onset
and consultation with a mental health professional ranging from 6 to 14 years
(Christiana et al., 2000; Kessler et al., 1998). An additional concern is treatment nonresponse, which may be associated with multiple factors (Donovan & Spence, 2000;
Ginsburg et al., 2011). Taken together, these findings have inspired a conceptual shift
4
in the development and implementation of mental health intervention worldwide
(Delaney & Staten, 2010), from traditional models of psychological intervention
delivery, to an increased focus on prevention as a way of improving both the
immediate health of children and young people and contributing to longer-term
resilience. Consequently there has been an increased emphasis on developing
innovative prevention protocols for preschool aged children (Bayer et al., 2011;
Bienvenu & Ginsburg, 2007; Fox et al., 2012; Fox, Haplern, & Forsyth, 2008;
Hirshfeld-Becker & Biederman, 2002). Such early preventive interventions have the
potential to reduce rates of depression, with anxiety typically preceding co-morbid
depressive disorders (Bienvenu & Ginsburg, 2007; Flannery-Schroeder & Kendall,
2004), and may be most powerful when targeted at high-risk life transitions, such as
entry to primary school or other significant transition points (Hirshfeld-Becker et al.,
2008), affording young children and their parents the opportunity to learn positive
coping and emotional regulation skills. Given many of the barriers associated with
accessing psychological intervention, and the high drop-out rates there is an increased
need for cost effective and accessible intervention delivered in a universal context
such as the school environment.
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) Parent-Based Intervention
A review of the literature identified several studies addressing early prevention and
intervention with this population, with many of these focused on the parent as the
target of the intervention. One of the earliest studies incorporating a preventive
intervention with an experimental design (N= 45) (La Freniere & Capuano, 1997)
assessed the effectiveness of a 20 session (6 month) integrated home-based prevention
program for anxious/withdrawn preschoolers. At post intervention, significant
immediate improvements in terms of teacher-rated social competence were identified
for children in the intervention group, with total levels of parental stress also
achieving a significant decline over the 6-month intervention. Similarly, a pilot study
examining the effectiveness of a selective prevention based parent program for
anxiety and behavioural inhibition (BI) (N = 7) (Rapee & Jacobs, 2002), which aimed
to minimise cost through minimal therapist input and long-term educational value
resulted in marked reductions in BI and anxiety diagnoses in children to 12 month
follow up.
5
In an extension to this study, Rapee, Kennedy, Ingram, Edwards, & Sweeney (2005)
conducted a larger scale selective prevention study examining the effects of a
universal CBT based prevention program for parents (N = 146, aged 36 - 62 months).
The intervention was designed to be brief to provide maximum potential for public
health implementation and targeted an identified risk factor for anxiety, an
inhibited/withdrawn temperament and included 6, 90-minute sessions. Children of
parents in the educational parent group demonstrated a significantly greater decrease
in anxiety diagnoses at 12-month follow-up, relative to the monitoring control
condition.
The effectiveness of a parent based early intervention program facilitated in a group
format (N = 71) (Kennedy, Rapee, & Edwards, 2009) demonstrated a significant
reduction in the frequency and severity of anxiety disorders and inhibition for children
in the intervention group, relative to children on the waitlist with further improvement
at 6 month follow-up. The findings provide further support for the benefits of early
parent based interventions to alter the developmental trajectory of anxiety in a highrisk group of young children.
The REACH for RESILIENCE (N = 734, aged 3 – 6 years), CBT based intervention,
developed exclusively for parents was trialed in 25 preschools over a three month
time period using a controlled-trial design (Dadds & Roth, 2008). Results
demonstrated decreases in teacher reported internalising and externalising difficulties
and a higher percentage of the intervention group moved from at-risk to low-risk
status following the intervention. This study represents one of a very few universal
trials with this population.
More recently, Rapee, Kennedy, Ingram, Edwards andSweeney (2010) conducted a
randomised controlled trial of a brief parent based intervention program, designed to
prevent anxiety in young children (N = 146). Children of parents that participated in
the intervention were found to have a reduced risk of suffering from symptoms of
anxiety at middle childhood (three year follow-up). This study is significant in that it
represents the first to demonstrate lasting changes in children’s symptoms of anxiety,
following a brief intervention in early childhood. This simple low cost intervention
may potentially alter the trajectory of anxiety and related disorders in young inhibited
6
children and provides promise for the effectiveness of parent-based intervention for
the prevention of early child anxiety.
A very recent study piloted the Confident Kids program (van der Sluis et al., 2012), a
CBT based parent intervention developed for parents of children aged 4 – 7 years (N
= 26). The intervention was delivered in four 2-hour group parent sessions across a 4
week period, with parent’s taking the role of “therapist coaches” for their children.
Comparable results to previous studies were obtained, with significant decreases in
child anxiety and behavioural inhibition as reported by both parents and teachers (van
der Sluis et al., 2012). This study provides further support of the value of
incorporating a parental component to early intervention with young children.
CBT Child- and Parent-Based Interventions
A number of studies have examined the efficacy of early intervention for childhood
anxiety which include both child and parental components. For example, the efficacy
of a CBT-based intervention for anxiety, the “Being Brave” (N = 64) program
(Hirshfeld-Becker, et al. 2008; Hirshfeld-Becker, et al., 2010). This program is a
developmentally appropriate, manualised CBT-based intervention program for
children and their parents, targeting identified risk factors for anxiety. Significant
reductions in anxiety disorder diagnoses were obtained with outcomes maintained at
two-year follow up. A similar intervention protocol for early childhood anxiety,
Taming “Sneaky Fears” (N = 32), based on a CBT framework (Monga, Young &
Owens, 2009) obtained comparable results, with significant reductions in anxiety
disorder diagnoses and clinician-rated improvement in functioning. These findings are
comparable to results obtained following CBT protocols for older children (Barrett,
Rapee, & Dadds & Ryan, 1996; Kendall, 1994; Kendall & Southam-Gerow, 1996)
and provide promising preliminary data for the adaptation of a CBT-based parent and
child protocol for early childhood and enhancing positive coping skills.
Waters, et al., (2009) conducted a trial assessing the efficacy of a group-based
cognitive behavioural intervention for young anxious children aged 4 to 8 years (N =
80). A parents-only CBT group intervention “Take ACTION” was directly compared
with the same intervention delivered to both children and parents, relative to a waitlist-control condition. No significant differences between the two active conditions on
7
other outcome measures were found. The study represents a valuable contribution to
the literature, providing support for the exclusive delivery of a CBT intervention to
parents of young anxious children as a viable intervention approach.
The first-ever universal school-based efficacy trial of the Fun FRIENDS program
(Barrett, 2007a,b) was recently conducted for young children (N = 263) (Pahl &
Barrett, 2010). This study represents one of very few universal trials which focus on
young anxious children, in addition to a parental component to the intervention. Fun
FRIENDS is a developmentally appropriate, play-based CBT intervention and
prevention program for anxiety and social and emotional skill development,
developed as a downward extension of the FRIENDS for Life program (Barrett, 2004,
2005). Immediately post intervention no significant differences were obtained;
however, at 12-month follow up, improvements were found on anxiety, BI and socialemotional competence for children in the IG. The results from this study provide
support for the use of universal intervention programs for young children
implemented within the school context.
The most recent preventive intervention for anxious preschoolers and their parents
involved a trial of the new Strengthening Early Emotional Development (SEED)
program (Fox, et al., 2012) to promote social and emotional and behavioural
competencies (N= 16, aged 3-5 years). SEED incorporates content from other
evidence-based group programs including the Preschool PATHS and the Cool Kids
program (Domitrovich, Cortes, & Greenberg, 2007; Rapee, Lyneham, & Schneiring,
2006). The intervention produced improvements in child emotional knowledge and
social reasoning skills in addition to reductions in parental anxiety and development
of more positive parental attitudes towards their children, providing further support
for the potential of preventive programs for early childhood anxiety.
The above literature review indicates a number of areas of concern. First, anxiety
disorders are among the most prevalent psychiatric disorders in young children
(Edwards, Rapee, Kennedy, & Spence, 2010; Egger & Angold, 2006) and have the
potential to cause significant developmental disruption (McLoone, Hudson, & Rapee,
2006) therefore enhancing our understanding of risk and protective factors is critical.
Second, the prevention of early childhood anxiety represents a significantly neglected
8
area of research, with limited attention to the effectiveness of child based early
intervention and prevention programs. Third, child-focused early interventions which
include a parental component have produced promising outcomes for the prevention
and treatment of early child anxiety, replication of these findings is required. Fourth,
there is a clear need for cost–effective universal preventive interventions for young
children.
Universal interventions where the population is the target of intervention (Mrazek &
Haggerty, 1994) are receiving increasing support as viable and cost effective
approaches to early intervention for anxiety (Lowry-Webster et al., 2001; Pahl &
Barrett, 2010; Stallard et al., 2007). Schools represent an optimal context for
prevention and early intervention efforts. The focus on the collective rather than
individual level avoids labeling children and normalises the promotion of positive
social and emotional skills. This practice also increases maintenance of these skills
due to sustained daily contact with children, peer support and inclusion of social and
emotional skill development as part of standard curriculum. Further, this approach
may neutralise many pragmatic and perceptual barriers to accessing community based
mental health services (Kendall, Settipani, & Cummings, 2012) and represents an
ideal context to practice and perfect skill acquisition (Barrett & Pahl, 2006).
Although there is a need for early intervention models, the effectiveness of such
intervention protocols for younger children remain largely unknown (Egger &
Angold, 2006; Eley et al., 2003; Spence, Rapee, McDonald, & Ingram, 2001; Sterba,
Egger, & Angold, 2007), which highlights a need for a prevention program with
established effectiveness in this population.
The primary objective of this study was to extend Pahl and Barrett’s (2010) pilot
study and evaluate the effectiveness of the Fun FRIENDS intervention, delivered as a
universal curriculum-based program to reduce anxiety and BI and enhance social and
emotional competence in young children. The study aimed to compare the outcome
of the Fun FRIENDS intervention group (IG) with the You Can Do It Active
Comparison (CG) and wait-list control groups (WLG) at pre, post and 12-month
follow-up. It was hypothesised the IG would be significantly more effective than the
CG, and that both interventions would be more effective than the waitlist. More
specifically, it was hypothesised that child anxiety symptoms would decrease from
9
pre to post-intervention and continue to improve at follow-up for the IG. Further it
was predicted that positive coping skills (approach behaviours, help seeking) and
emotional regulation skills (self soothing, anxiety management) would increase and
maladaptive coping (avoidance behaviour and reassurance seeking) would decrease
from pre to post- intervention, for the IG with results maintained at 12-month followup.
The second objective of the study was to explore whether it was possible to have a
positive impact on levels of parental (mother and father) anxiety and distress. It was
expected that maternal and paternal anxiety and distress in the intervention group
would decrease as rates of anxiety decreased in the child. Thus the inclusion of
parents in the intervention may be critical in terms of educating parents and enhancing
positive coping skills for themselves and their children.
Method
Recruitment
Schools were recruited via email correspondence sent by Brisbane Catholic Education
Administration, Australia inviting all 104 Catholic Education preschools and primary
schools in the greater metropolitan area of Brisbane to participate in the research
project. 16 of the schools that volunteered to participate following the initial email
were contacted, and an information meeting outlining the project was held for
principals and teachers for each of the 16 schools. 14 of the 16 schools that
demonstrated initial interest, agreed to participate in the study. The majority of the
children attending these schools (and characteristic of the general population of
Brisbane) were White, and working to middle class. Detailed information about
ethnicity was not obtained.
Once informed consent had been obtained from each of the principals, the
participating schools were matched on socioeconomic status and then the schools
were randomly assigned to an intervention group (IG), active comparison group (CG)
or waitlist control group (WL). Following random assignment letters were sent to the
families in each school inviting parents to attend an information evening discussing
the rationale for the research project and details of what would be required of each
family should they consent to participate.
10
Participants
The final sample consisted of 488 children (271 females, 217 males) between the aged
of 4 and 7 years (mean age = 5.42 years, SD =0.67) across 14 schools. Random
assignment of the schools to the three conditions, resulted in the final sample of 160
children (95 female, 64 male) in the IG, 196 children (101 female, 95 male) in the CG
and 130 children (75 female, 58 male) in the WLG. 440 fathers and 484 mothers
completed the battery of questionnaires. Approximately 3.3% of the sample reported
an annual family income (Australian dollars) under $30,000, 13.3% between $30,000
and $60,000 and 76.5% of the sample reported an income above $60,000. The schools
ranged in terms of enrolment number from 249 to 641 students and socioeconomic
status of the schools ranged from 1033 - 1200 based on the Index of Community
Socio-Educational Advantage (ICSEA, mean = 1000, SD = 100). The number of prep
and pre prep classes varied across the schools from 1 to 4 classes participating in the
research. 31 teachers participated in the study.
Measures
Parents and teachers of children who consented to be involved in the research
completed a battery of questionnaires at three different points in time (preintervention, post-intervention and 12-month follow-up). These measures are detailed
below;
Parent Completed Measures for Child
Preschool Anxiety Scale
The Preschool Anxiety Scale (PAS; Spence, Rapee, McDonald, & Ingram, 2001),
adapted from the Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale, is a 34-item parent report
assessment designed to assess childhood anxiety symptoms as defined by the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, 4th Edition (DSM-IV, APA, 2000). The PAS
provides a total score of anxiety (minimum score 0, to a maximum score of 112), in
addition to five subscale scores: separation anxiety, physical injury fears, social
phobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and generalised anxiety disorder. The PAS
has adequate psychometric properties and good construct validity with the Child
Behaviour Checklist (Achenbach, 1991; 1992; Achenbach & Rescorla, 2000),
11
correlations ranging from .59 to .68. Both parents completed the PAS conjointly in
this study.
Behavioural Inhibition Questionnaire
The Behavioural Inhibition Questionnaire (BIQ; Bishop, Spence, & McDonald, 2003)
is a 30-item parent report questionnaire assessing the frequency of behaviours
associated with behavioural inhibition (BI) across a 7-point likert scale. The measure
provides a total BI score, in addition to 6 specific scores characteristic of BI; peer
situations, physical challenge, separation/preschool, performance situations,
unfamiliar adults and general novel situations. The BIQ has demonstrated good
psychometric properties, with high internal consistence (.87 for mother report, .85 for
father report) and strong convergent validity (.87 for mother, .86 for father) against
the inhibition scale of the Temperament Assessment Battery for Children – Revised
(Martin, 1994), and good internal consistency for all informants. Parents were invited
to complete this measure conjointly.
Behavioural and Emotional Rating Scale, Second Edition,
The Behavioural and Emotional Rating Scale (BERS-2; Epstein & Sharma, 1998) is a
52-item parent report measure, designed to assess five factors related to children’s
emotional and behaviour strengths; interpersonal strengths, family involvement,
intrapersonal strength, school functioning and affective strength. The BERS-2 has
demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability (r> .83) and moderate to excellent testretest reliability ranging from .53 to .99 (Epstein et al, 1999). This measure was used
to assess social-emotional competence, parents were invited to complete this
conjointly.
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ; Goodman, 1997) is a 25-item
measure designed to assess psychological adjustment in children aged 3 to 16 years.
The items are divided between 5 scales: Emotional difficulties, Conduct Problems,
Hyperactivity and Inattention, Peer Difficulties, and Pro-Social Behaviour.
Participants are required to indicate either “not true (0), “somewhat true” (1) or
“certainly true” (2) for each of the statements, with higher scores indicative of more
significant problems for each subscale, excluding pro-social behaviour where higher
12
scores indicate positive adjustment. The SDQ has sound psychometric properties for
all subscales (Vostanis, 2006), internal consistency (mean Cronbach a: .73), crossinformant correlation (mean: 0.34), or retest stability after 4 to 6 months (mean: 0.62).
(Goodman, 2001; Goodman & Scott, 1999). Assessment of the psychometric
properties of the SDQ based on an Australian sample generated evidence moderate to
strong internal reliability across all SDQ subscales (Hawes & Dadds, 2004).
Adequate validity was also achieved in terms of the relationship of the SDQ subscales
to one another. In addition correlations between the subscales, teacher ratings, and
diagnostic interviews demonstrated sound external validity (Hawes & Dadds, 2004).
Parents were invited to complete this measure conjointly.
Devereux Early Childhood Assessment Clinical Form
The Devereux Early Childhood Assessment Clinical Form (DECA-C, LeBuffe &
Naglieri, 1999) is a standardised, norm-referenced behaviour rating scale that
evaluates behaviour related to social and emotional resilience and concerns in
preschool aged children aged 2-5 years. The DECA evaluates the frequency of
positive behaviours (strengths) as well as negative behaviours (concerns). The
positive behaviours related to resilience include three Protective Factors Scales;
initiative (11 items), self control (8 items) and attachment (8 items). The Total
Protective Factors Scale is a composite of the three scales and provides an overall
indication of the strength of the child’s protective factors. The behaviours related to
social and emotional problems comprise four Behavioural Concern Scales; Attention
problems (7 items), Aggression (7 items), Emotional control problems (8 items) and
Withdrawn/depressed (9 items). A Total Behavioural Concerns Scale is a composite
of the four-behavioural concern scales, provides an overall index of the magnitude
and severity of the child’s beahvioural problems. Studies indicate that the DECA-C is
a reliable instrument for assessing social and emotional competence and behaviour in
preschool aged children (Buhs, 2003; Chittooron, 2003; Reddy, 2007). Internal
reliability alpha coefficients for parents range from a low of .66 on Withdrawal/
Depression to .78 on Emotional Control Problems, with a median of .76. The
development and standardisation of the DECA, including all original psychometric
studies, are described in detail in the DECA technical manual (LeBuffe & Naglieri,
1999). The DECA was normed on a representative American sample of 2,000
children across 28 states. Half of the children in the sample were rated by a parent or
13
other family caregiver; and half by a preschool teacher. It is important to note that
whilst the measure was normed on a sample of children aged 2-5 years, in the current
trial the DECA was administered to all children in the sample with ages ranging from
4 – 7 years. Parents were invited to complete this measure conjointly.
Parent Completed Measures for Self
Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale
The Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale (DASS-21; Lovibond & Lovibond, 1994) is
a 21-item self-report assessment measure. This measure provides an assessment of
parental anxiety, depression and stress. The measure has demonstrated excellent
psychometric properties with good reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha ranging from
0.73 to 0.82 for the anxiety subscale and 0.82 for depression (Clara, Cos & Enns,
2001; Henry & Crawford, 2005; Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995). Studies have reported
good estimates of internal consistency reliability for scale scores (range=.82 to .97)
in both clinical and nonclinical samples (e.g., Henry & Crawford, 2005; Lovibond &
Lovibond, 1995).The measure has also been found to correlate strongly with other
widely used measures of depression and anxiety (Augustine., et al., 2012; Sukantarat,
Williamson, & Brett, 2007). Mothers and fathers were invited to complete this
measure independently from one another.
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS; Zigmond & Snaith, 1983) is a
self-assessment instrument for detecting clinically significant depression and anxiety
in patients attending outpatient medical clinics and for discriminating between anxiety
and depression. It has been widely used as a screening instrument outside of the
hospital setting, and also for rating psychiatric patients. The HADS is a self-report,
14 item scale with seven items measuring anxiety (HADS-A) and seven measuring
depression (HADS-D). Scores range from 0 - 21 for each scale; higher scores
represent more distress. The time frame refers to mood during the previous week.
The HADS appears to have psychometric properties, with correlations between the
two subscales reported to vary from.40 to.74 (mean.56) (Bjelland, Dahl, Haug &
Neckelmann, 2002). Cronbach's alpha for HADS-A varied from.68 to.93 (mean.83)
and for HADS-D from.67 to.90 (mean.82). The sensitivity and specificity for both
HADS-A and HADS-D (0.80) were reported to be consistent with the General Health
14
Questionnaire (GHQ; Goldberg, 1978). Correlations between the HADS and other
commonly used questionnaires designed to assess anxiety and depression were
reported to be within the range of .49 to.83. (Bjelland, Dahl, Haug & Neckelmann,
2002). Mothers and fathers were invited to complete this measure independently
Parenting Stress Index, Short Form
The Parenting Stress Index, Short Form (PSI – SF; Bidin, 1994) is a 36-item parent
report measure which provides an overall measure of stress within the parent child
relationship and includes three sub scales; Parental Distress, Parent-Child
Dysfunctional Interaction and Difficult Child. The PSI-SF is designed for the early
identification of parenting and family characteristics that fail to promote normal
development and functioning in children, children with behavioural and emotional
problems, and parents who are at-risk for dysfunctional parenting. Studies of testretest reliability (r =0.84) and internal consistency (α = .91) demonstrate high to
excellent reliability (Abidin, 1995). The total score on the PSI-SF was used as a
measure of parenting stress. Mothers and fathers were invited to complete this
measure independently.
Measure Completed by Teachers
The Devereux Early Childhood Assessment Clinical Form, Teacher Report (DECAC, LeBuffe & Naglieri, 1999) is identical to the parent report form. This is a
standardised, norm-referenced behaviour rating scale that evaluates social and
emotional resilience and concerns in preschool aged children. The DECA evaluates
the frequency of positive behaviours (strengths) as well as negative behaviours
(concerns). For teachers, the alpha coefficients range from .80 on
Withdrawal/Depression to .90 on Attention Problems, with a median of .88.
Procedure
Phase One: Pre-assessment Screening
All parents were sent an information sheet and pre assessment questionnaire detailing
the research project. Participants were informed that all responses would be
confidential and would only be viewed by research staff and that they were free to
withdraw at any time. In addition it was made clear that the intervention would be
delivered during class time and at no cost to parents. None of the schools involved in
15
the current research project had been directly involved with the Fun FRIENDS
program before this research project. Of the 14 schools that agreed to participate,
none of the parents refused to allow their child to participate in the program, this is
consistent with the pilot Fun FRIENDS study (Pahl and Barrett, 2010) and is likely
due to the fact that the program was implemented as part of school curriculum.
Pre-intervention assessment was conducted within a two-week time period with
questionnaires sent to teachers and parents through school administration, with
completed questionnaires returned to classroom teachers. Teachers completed the
DECA for each child in their class participating in the research. The option to
complete the questionnaires individually with the researcher was offered to parents to
ensure all participants comprehended the questions regardless of academic or English
language ability.
Post intervention assessment was conducted within two weeks of completion of the
program and approximately 24 weeks following pre-assessment screening. At 12
month follow up the same procedure was adhered to, with schools sending the
questionnaires to parents and collected by the classroom teachers within a two week
time limit.
Intervention
Intervention Protocol – Fun FRIENDS
The Intervention program used was the Fun FRIENDS program. Fun FRIENDS is a
developmentally appropriate downward extension of the FRIENDS for Life program
created for the prevention of anxiety and promotion of social and emotional skills and
resilience in early childhood (Barrett, 2007). The program name Fun FRIENDS is an
acronym for the strategies taught within the program, with each letter corresponding
to a specific skill. See Table 1, for a description of session content. The primary
components of the program include relaxation, cognitive restructuring, attention
training and graded exposure to anxiety provoking situations and problem solving,
which are facilitated by peer and family support. The Fun FRIENDS program
actively involves parents, teachers and children to promote skill acquisition and
reinforcement of skills across contexts.
16
The intervention commenced approximately two weeks following pre-intervention
assessment. Teachers were advised that the programs were to be delivered across two
school terms with a recommended delivery schedule of one session per week.
Further, the teachers were instructed that the program was to be delivered in
chronological, however there was significant opportunity for creativity within each
session. Teachers were provide with a leader’s manual outlining the content and
process for each of the 10 sessions (Barrett, 2007) and each child was provided with a
Family Learning Adventure workbook which provides step-by-step instruction for
home implementation of the session skills (Barrett, 2007b).
Teacher Training
Prior to commencement of the program all classroom teachers across the 4 schools
allocated to the Intervention Group attended a one-day intensive training workshop,
which provided psycho-education about childhood anxiety, the theoretical rationale of
Fun FRIENDS and instruction in delivery and facilitation of the program. Content
also addressed ethical issues associated with running groups with children and group
process skills. The Fun FRIENDS Group Leader Manual (Barrett, 2007a) training
manual, training aids, handouts, exercises, discussion questions, videos and overheads
were standardised across training workshops via a training manual and resource kit
(Barrett, 2007a). The lead researcher, a registered Clinical Psychologist, was
responsible for conducting the training of all teachers allocated to the Fun FRIENDS
program in addition to facilitating parent talks for all of the participating schools.
Regular contact was initiated by the lead researcher with all teachers from the
participating schools to provide support and answer questions relating to the
implementation of the programs or address any questions arising. In addition the You
Can Do It team was also available for consultation through the lead researcher to
address questions arising from the implementation of this program. Regular
consultation and communication with parents across all of the 14 schools was also
maintained through updates in school newsletters. Parents were also provided with
contact details for the researchers should they wish to discuss any concerns or provide
feedback. In order to assess the integrity of the intervention protocol the teachers
within the Fun FRIENDS intervention group were required to complete a weekly
checklist indicating compliance with the manual session content.
17
Parent Sessions
Parents were encouraged to attend two parent sessions across the course of program
implementation and coincided sessions 4 and 7. Parent sessions were conducted
during the evening to increase the possibility that both parents may be able to attend.
Session content included educating parents about child anxiety, social and emotional
competence and resilience and outlined each of the component skills of the Fun
FRIENDS program. Parents were encouraged to practice the skills and strategies in
the home environment to ensure generalisation across contexts.
Insert Table 1 here.
Intervention Protocol - The You Can Do It Comparison Group (YCDI)
The You Can Do It CBT based social and emotional skills was included as an active
control condition. This program is endorsed as an effective school based program,
designed to be delivered at a universal level by teachers in the classroom setting to
promote confidence and social and emotional strength (Ashdown & Bernard, 2012;
Bernard & Walton, 2011; Bernard 2006). A recent study, similar in design to the
current trial, examined the effect of the You Can Do It program on the social and
emotional development and academic achievement of preparatory and grade 1
students attending a Catholic school in Melbourne, Australia (N = 99) (Ashdown &
Bernard, 2012; Bernard & Walton, 2011). The program was delivered over 10 weeks
by classroom teachers, with results indicating a statistically significant improvement
in social and emotional competence and well being in children and a reduction in
problem behaviours as rated by teachers.
Unlike the Fun FRIENDS program, You Can Do It does not involve any specific
training for facilitators in terms of the implementation of the program. Teachers
received the program material and manual and were required to administer the
program as per the implementation directions.
The main objective of the You Can Do It program is the development of young
people’s social and emotional capabilities, including: Confidence, Persistence,
18
Organisation, Getting Along, and Resilience. Central to the development of these 5
Foundations is instilling in young people 12 Habits of the Mind that support and
foster the 5 Foundations, including Accepting Myself, Taking Risks, Being
Independent, I Can Do It, Giving Effort, Working Tough, Setting Goals, Planning My
Time, Being Tolerant of Others, Thinking First, Playing by the Rules, and Social
Responsibility (includes the values of Caring, Doing Your Best, Freedom, Honesty,
Integrity, Respect, Responsibility, Understanding, Tolerance, and Inclusion) (Bernard,
1997).
Parent Training
The same initial parent information evening that was offered to parents in the IG, was
also offered to the Comparison Group. An additional parent session was conducted
by You Can Do It program educators half way through the program to provide parents
with further information about how to reinforce the skills at home. The parent
evenings at each of the schools was facilitated by the Director of the You Can Do It
program.
Program Implementation
Following consent and completion of the same battery of questionnaires as the IG, the
schools were provided with the You Can Do It program and resources. The teachers
were responsible for implementing the program as per the guidelines for teachers set
out in the manual. As per the IG, the comparison You Can Do It program was
implemented once per week for approximately one hour across school two terms,
facilitated by classroom teachers. A registered psychologist was available during the
period of implementation to provide support for the teachers and respond to questions.
Teachers were provided with the program manual and all required props and puppets.
Wait-list Group
The five schools allocated to the monitoring comparison group received the same
initial parent information evening. The identical process of completing questionnaires
was followed as for the IG and CG, with questionnaires completed at pre, post and 12
month follow-up. The schools continued with standard curriculum as normal for the
12-month wait period, with Clinical Psychologists available for consultation during
19
this period of time. Following the 12-month wait, all of the schools were offered the
Fun FRIENDS program.
Results
Preliminary analysis
Preliminary analysis revealed large amounts of missing data for each of the father
response measures (ranging from 25% for the defensive responding scale to 16% for
the DASS-21). The PSI-SF was not completed by 10% of mothers at follow-up, and
8% of mothers at post-test. All remaining variables had less than 6% missing data.
In all, 200 of the 488 participants were missing on at least one observation. There
were 15 cases that were missing on more than 30% of their data, and these data were
removed to prevent potential bias arising from these non-responders. For the
remaining participants data was clustered according to the pattern of responding using
the VIM package in R (R Development Core Team. 2007). Only one clear pattern of
missing data was observed, with 6.3% of respondents missing all father response data.
The remaining participants showed no tendency to respond in any given pattern,
suggesting that the data appear to be effectively missing at random across the data set.
Due to the large amounts of missing data on some variables, it was decided to analyse
only complete data points, using Linear Mixed Effects models for the analysis of the
overall effect of the intervention. Linear mixed effects models include all
observations, which are valid at each time point and are recommended as they reduce
bias, which might otherwise be created in excluding those respondents with
incomplete data (Cnaan, Laird, Slassor, 1998). Although there may still be issues of
generalisability of the findings, the analysis of complete data is less problematic for
multivariate analyses than is imputation of data when data are extensively missing as
these analyses make less assumptions about the nature of the missing data and
therefore produce less biased estimates (Kalton & Kasprzyk, 1982).
Examination of the distributions of the continuous measures revealed significant
skewness as well as significant outliers among a large number of clinical measures.
For each variable that was significantly skewed an appropriate transform was
identified from the ladder of powers (square root, log, inverse and inverse log), which
transformed the variable to non-significantly skew (Tabachnick and Fidell, 2007). All
20
of the Parent BERS-2 measures were negatively skewed, as well as the following
Parent report subscales on the DECA; attachment, initiative, protective factors, and
self control. The parent report hyperactivity subscale on the SDQ was also negatively
skewed. These variables were reflected before transformation, and then re-reflected
to retain their direction. Only the BIQ social novelty scale could not be transformed
with this method, this variable was transformed using the best power transform using
the Box-Cox procedure (Box & Cox, 1964). The optimal power for this variable was
0.72. Significant outliers were winsorized at 3 standard deviations to reduce their
influence on analyses (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2007).
Insert Table 2 here.
Insert Table 3 here.
Exploratory Factor Analysis – Parent data
An exploratory factor analysis was conducted on all measures using principal axis
factoring with oblimin rotation. Examination of the scree plot (Figure 1) showed
potentially 5 factors with eigenvalues > 1, and a discontinuity after the fifth factor.
Examination of both the four- and five-factor solutions revealed an identical factor
structure for the first 4 factors, while the 5th factor comprised only a single variable;
the DECA protective factors scale, which loaded more strongly on the second than on
the 5th factor, and therefore the four-factor solution was preferred in the interest of
interpretability.
Insert Figure 1: Scree Plot here.
Examination of the factor loadings (table 4) for the oblique factor solution revealed a
simple structure. Based on the interpretation of the factor loadings, the first factor
was labeled behavioural and emotional functioning as it comprised only of 5 items
from the BERS-2 scale, the second was labeled behavioural difficulties (as it
positively loaded behavioural problems from the SDQ (4 items) and DECA (5 items),
and negatively loaded protective factors from both tests) the third was labeled
Inhibition as it comprised the PAS social anxiety scale, the BIQ social and situational
novelty scales, and the BIQ physical challenges scale, and the fourth factor was
21
labeled parenting stress as it comprised 6 items solely from the parenting stress index.
After standardization of the items, Cronbach’s alphas for the index items on each
scale were .86 (factor 1), .88 (factor 2), .78 (factor 3), and .86 (factor 4).
Intercorrelations between the factors are provided in table 5.
Insert table 4.
Insert table 5.
Baseline differences
Preliminary one-way ANOVAs on each of the factors revealed that there was no
significant difference in the baseline scores for Factor 4, however significant baseline
differences were identified between the groups on factors 1 through 3 (F(2, 470) =
13.54, p < .001 for factor 1, F(2, 466) = 3.31, p = .037 for factor 2, F(2,470) = 17.33,
p < .001). For factor 1 the waitlist group scored significantly higher than either of the
two treatment groups (p < .05), but the treatment groups did not differ significantly.
For factor 2 (behavioural difficulties) the waitlist group scored significantly higher
than the Fun Friends, but not the You can do it group (p < .05), while for factor 3 the
waitlist group scored significantly lower than both of the treatment groups and in
addition the You can do it group scored significantly higher than the Fun Friends
group (p < .05). To account for this, the followup analyses for the group differences
were performed using ANCOVA controlling for baseline scores as recommended by
Rausch, Maxwell, and Kelley (2003).
Intervention Effects
A two-way linear mixed effects model was conducted examining each of the factor
scores at three time points (pre-test, post-test and at 12 months follow-up) for each of
the three groups (Fun Friends, You Can Do It, and Waitlist). Models included time as
a categorical repeated measures factor, group as a categorical between-subjects factor,
and participant identification and school as a random factor to account for the nested
nature of the design. Models were compared using a variety of covariance structures
as is recommended, including first-order autoregressive, compound symmetry and
scaled identity and model selection was based upon the Akaike Information Criterion
22
(AIC). For factors 2-3 the first-order autogressive model provided the best fit, while
for factors 1 and 4 the compound symmetry model provided the lower AIC.
Behavioural and Emotional Strength
Analysis revealed significant main effects of time for all factors (F(2,939) = 453.84, p
<.001 for behavioural and emotional strength, F(2,912.92) = 299.85, p <.001 for
behavioural difficulties, F(2,971.14) = 289.99, p <.001 for behavioural inhibition, and
F(2,897.89) = 55.32, p <.001 for Parenting Stress). There were significant two-way
interactions between time and group for factors 1 – 3 (F(4,939.01) = 50.39, p <.001
for BERS-2, F(4,912.93) = 6.37, p < .001 for behavioural difficulties, and F(971.14) =
59.62, p <.001 for inhibition).
For the three factors that exhibited a significant interaction, simple effects of time
were examined for each of the three intervention groups. Analysis revealed that for
behavioural and emotional strength, all groups improved significantly from pretest to
post-test and continued to improve significantly from post-test to follow-up (F(2, 310)
= 352.59, p < .001 for Fun FRIENDS, F(2, 371.06) = 160.86, p < .001 for You Can
Do It, and F(2, 258) = 31.21, p < .001 for the Waitlist group). Controlling for
baseline scores, the Fun Friends group improved significantly more than either the
You can do it group (p < .001) or the Waitlist group (p = .007) at post-test, and
improved significantly more than both other groups at follow-up (p < .001). The You
can do it group improved significantly more than the Waitlist group at follow-up (p <
.001 ) but not at post-test (p = .061).
Behavioural Difficulties
All groups differed significantly from pre-test to post-test, in terms of behavioural
difficulties and continued to improve from post-test to follow-up F(2,310) = 202.75, p
<.001 for Fun-Friends, F(2,362) = 85.31, p <.001 for You Can Do It, and F(2,253) =
32.69, p <.001 for the Waitlist group). Controlling for baseline scores, both the Fun
FRIENDS group and the You Can Do It group improved significantly more than the
Waitlist group at post-test (p < .001 and p = .002 respectively), while the Fun Friends
and You can do it groups did not differ (p = .095). At follow-up, neither group
improved significantly more than the waitlist, controlling for baseline scores, however
23
the Fun Friends group did improve significantly more than the You can do it group (p
= .021).
Behavioural Inhibition
In terms of behavioural inhibition, both the Fun FRIENDS and the Comparison Group
improved significantly from pre-test to post-test and then continued to improve
significantly from post-test to follow-up (F(2, 327.4) = 375.77, p < .001 for FunFriends, and F(2, 384.69) = 106.84, p < .001 for You Can Do It), while the Waitlist
group did not improve significantly from pre-test to post-test or from post-test to
follow-up, but did have overall lower scores at follow-up than at pretest (F(2, 260.68)
= 3.23, p < .001). Controlling for baseline scores, both the Fun FRIENDS and You
Can Do It groups improved significantly more than the Waitlist group, and the Fun
Friends group improved significantly more than the You can do it group both at posttest and at follow-up ( all ps < .001).
Insert Figure 2: Four Factor Scores at Pre, Post and 12 month Followup here.
Comparison of the Fun-Friends intervention for high-versus low-anxious
children
To establish whether the Fun-Friends intervention was significantly more effective for
high-anxious than for low-anxious children, those children scoring in the top third on
the PAS total score were compared to those scoring in the bottom third of the group.
Two-way linear mixed effects models were conducted comparing the high- and lowanxious children in terms of their intervention gains, and the interaction term was
examined to determine whether a significant difference in improvement existed
according to the basline anxiety of the child.
Significant interactions were found for the behavioural and emotional strength factor
(F(2, 184.19) = 5.16, p = .007) the behavioural difficulties factor (F(2, 189.54) = 4.32,
p = .015), and the behavioural inhibition factor (F(2,179.42) = 15.48, p < .001).
Followup simple effects for the BERS-2 factor demonstrated that both high- and lowanxious children improved significantly from pretest to post-test and from post-test to
follow-up, however this improvement was greater for the high anxious children.
24
Examination of figure 3 shows that although the high anxious children initially
displayed lower scores than the low-anxious group, by the followup time point both
groups had equivalent scores.
Insert Figure 3: Levels of Social and Emotional Competence at Pre, Post and Followup for the Fun FRIENDS group here.
Follow-up simple effects of time for the Behavioural difficulties factor showed
significant intervention effects for both the high-anxious group (F(2, 106.45) = 43.85,
p < .001) than for the low-anxious group (F(2,74.2) = 44.4, p < .001 ). Both high- and
low-anxious groups improved from pretest to post-test, and both reverted to some
extent at followup, but were still significantly improved relative to baseline. The high
anxious group however experienced slightly more improvement (and reverted slightly
more) than the low anxious group (see figure 4).
Insert Figure 4: Levels of Behavioural Difficulties at Pre, Post and Follow-up for the
Fun FRIENDS group.
Follow-up simple effects of time for the Inhibition factor showed greater intervention
effects for the high-anxious group (F(2, 224.15) = 194.26, p < .001) than for the lowanxious group (F(2, 224.15) = 107.79, p < .001 ). Both high- and low-anxious groups
improved from pretest to post-test, but only the high-anxious group continued to
improve from post-test to follow-up. For the Inhibition measure the high-anxious
group did not reach the same performance level as the low-anxious group (figure 5).
Insert Figure 5: Levels of Behavioural Inhibition at Pre, Post and Follow-up for the
Fun FRIENDS group.
Teacher Protective factors rating
A two-way linear mixed effects model conducted on the teacher ratings of the DECA
protective factors scale. Analysis revealed a significant main effect of time,
F(2,904.54) = 32.68, p <.001. Analysis also revealed a significant time*group
interaction, F(4,904.55) = 8.699, p <.001, shown in Figure 5. Only the Fun FRIENDS
group changed significantly over time, F(2,284) = 35.69, p <.001. The Fun FRIENDS
25
group improved significantly from pretest to post-test, and maintained this level of
function at follow-up. Controlling for baseline differences, the Fun FRIENDS group
improved significantly more than either the You can do it group or Waitlist group at
both post-test and follow-up (ps < .001), while the You can do it and Waitlist groups
did not differ significantly.
Insert Figure 5: Teacher Protective Factors at Pre, Post and Follow-up for the Fun
FRIENDS group, here.
A supplementary analysis was then conducted comparing teacher and parent ratings
of the DECA protective factors. The analysis revealed a significant large main effect
of respondent, such that parents overall rated the protective factors scale higher than
did teachers F(1,751.43) = 334.76, p <.001, as well as a main effect of time,
F(2,745.78) = 433.93, p <.001, and a significant two-way interaction between
respondent and time F(2,745.78) = 192.14, p <.001. There were significant simple
effects of time for both parents, F(2,309.13) = 916.63, p <.001, and teachers,
F(2,282.82) = 38.76, p <.001. For both kinds of respondents, the post-test scores
differed significantly to pretest scores, and follow-up scores did not differ
significantly to scores at posttest. Parents however showed significantly larger
intervention effects than did teachers.
Insert Figure 6: Comparison of Teacher and Parent Ratings of Protective Factors for
the Fun FRIENDS group, here
Comparison of mother and father distress ratings
A two-way linear mixed effects model comparing mother and father ratings of
parental distress revealed a very large main effect of respondent, F(1,713.661) =
4173.673, p <.001, such that fathers rated their distress a great deal higher overall
than did mothers. There was also a significant main effect of time, F(2, 698.55) =
24.92, p <.001, such that scores improved significantly from pretest to post-test for
both groups, but did not change from post-test to follow-up. There was no significant
interaction between the factors, F(2,695.87) = 2.13, p = 0.119. Refer Figure 6
Insert Figure 7: Comparison of Mother and Father Levels of Parental Distress, here.
26
Discussion
This study was the first to examine the effectiveness of a universal school based
delivery of the Fun FRIENDS program with children aged 4-7 years. The findings
provide promising support for early intervention models for reducing anxiety and
increasing social and emotional strength in this population regardless pre-intervention
anxiety symptomatology. This has important implications for the prevention and
treatment of anxiety in early childhood as it suggests that classroom based universal
early intervention programs are sufficient to produce clinically significant change.
The fact that intervention gains were maintained 12 months post intervention provides
further support and provides evidence for the importance of preventive universal
intervention in early childhood. Given that formal education in early childhood has a
clear focus on social-emotional development, prevention programs that target
emotional regulation and social competence have the potential to reinforce skill
acquisition during the optimal developmental period (Humphries & Keenan, 2006).
A review of the main findings shows that compared with children in the WL
condition, children in the two active conditions demonstrated greater symptom
reduction and enhancement of social and emotional competence. Overall, both active
intervention conditions appear to have produced significant and comparable gains,
however the Fun FRIENDS intervention produced greater improvements at post and
follow up. The results have clear implications for early intervention, providing
support for the positive impact of the Fun FRIENDS program in terms of enhancing
social and emotional competence in this population. Delays or impairments in
emotional regulation and social competence are associated with maladaptive coping
behaviour and increased risk of childhood psychopathology including anxiety
disorders (Southam-Gerow & Kendall, 2002).
Another finding of the study demonstrated significant decreases in BI from pre to post
assessment and at 12 month follow up for the IG suggesting that changes in anxiety
can positively impact BI. Research indicates the enhancement of a child’s ability to
regulate emotional reactivity may contribute to a resilience process and subsequently
lead to decreases in BI, and potentially reducing symptoms of anxiety (Ballespí, Janeé
& Riba, 2012).
27
A significant finding of the study was that fathers rated levels of parental distress and
negative perceptions of their child’s behaviour a great deal higher overall than did
mothers, however both mothers and fathers showed significant improvements over
time. This may occur through the process of enhancing parental confidence and
fostering heightened awareness. Improved insight may translate into flexibility of
maladaptive parenting attitudes and behaviours such as over control and over
protection. Further by teaching parents positive coping strategies to assist their
children to regulate emotions, this may result in a decrease in frustration and greater
understating of their child’s anxiety. These results provide support for the inclusion
of parents in interventions for young children with anxiety, and has implications for
behavioural difficulties as the study had a positive impact on behavioural issues post
intervention. Whilst this was not a specific objective of the intervention this is an
important finding given the negative impact on bullying and difficulties with peer
relationships on development and psychosocial functioning.
A comparison of high versus low anxiety in the active group showed that despite
differing baseline scores pre assessment, both groups achieved a comparatively
positive response post intervention with continued improvement at 12-month followup. Further analysis on the high versus low anxiety groups demonstrated decreased
BI for both groups, with only the high anxious group maintaining improvements at 12
month follow-up. This finding may suggest that independent of risk status it is
possible to positively impact levels of behavioural inhibition and enhance positive
coping behaviour for highly anxious children through a universal intervention.
However the dose requirements for children presenting with high behavioural
inhibition may be greater than children with low levels at initial assessment.
In terms of protective factors both parents and teachers reported improvements in
children’s emotional and behavioural competence over time for the IG, with parents
reporting larger improvements. Whilst there was a difference in the extent of
improvement between parents and teachers, this concordance is important as it
suggests that the Fun FRIENDS intervention facilitated by teachers in the school
setting has the potential to enhance positive coping and resilience across contexts.
28
Limitations
There were a number of limitations of this study. First, the lack of adherence and
social validity data may have implications for the validity of some of the findings. It is
recommended that future studies include both adherence and social validity
assessment. Likewise there may have been an issue with the continuity or delivery of
the program given the number of teachers involved. Secondly, the level of missing or
incomplete data represents a significant limitation. It is likely that much of this
missing data is related to the length of the questionnaires and the fact that the schools
allocated to the 12-month wait list did not have any short-term incentive to
participate. It is recommended that future researchers address this issue in the form of
incentive or by offering assessment via telephone or Internet. Lastly there may have
been some issue with consistency regarding the number of participating classes per
school which may have impacted on results.
Strengths
A strength of the study was the methodology employed because of the inclusion of
both a comparison, 12-month waitlist group and allows for more control of maturation
and other factors that may impact results. Further, the inclusion of asset based as well
as deficit measures is also of value, as the focus of the intervention is not simply to
achieve reduction in symptoms but also promotion of optimal wellness and positive
coping through skill acquisition.
The Fun FRIENDS program is a manualised program. The use of a facilitators
manual outlining the important components of the intervention, balanced with the
opportunity for facilitators to be flexible and creative while tailoring the intervention
is an advantage and addresses the criticisms associated with other manualised
programs (see Addis, Cardemil, Duncan & Miller, 2006; Addis & Krasnow, 2000).
This approach to intervention is consistent with Kendall and Beidas’s (2007) call for
“flexibility within fidelity” an umbrella term referring to the application of central
components of intervention, whilst customising to the child (Kendall, Settpiani &
Cummings, 2012).
A further strength of the study is the inclusion of both mother and father measures of
anxiety and distress. This is of value due to the relative neglect of the father’s role in
29
early child childhood anxiety with recent research showing a child’s reactive
temperament has an adverse effect on father’s parenting in particular (Bögels &
Phares, 2008; Majdandžić, de Vente, Feinberg, Aktar & Bögels, 2011).
Future Directions
Summary
The majority of school based prevention programs have focused on older children and
adolescents. Given the high prevalence and early onset of anxiety disorders, there
may be significant advantages in preventive intervention targeting young children in
an attempt to avoid significant suffering and impairment. Findings from this trial of
the Fun FRIENDS intervention provide preliminary support for the effectiveness of
universal implementation of the program in schools, for children with varying levels
of pre intervention anxiety. Improvements in behavioural inhibition, social and
emotional competence and reductions in behavioural difficulties were observed in
addition to decreases in levels of parenting distress. The next step in evaluating the
effectiveness of this program will be to replicate the findings, conducting a
randomised controlled trial with long term follow up and the inclusion of additional
measures. There are a number of implications of this study, which are discussed.
It is recommend that future studies may benefit from designing psycho educational
sessions, either briefer or enhanced accessibility for parents via internet or phone to
improve parental participation. This may have increased benefits for child and
parental anxiety and may enhance maintenance of treatment gains. Furthermore,
longer term follow-up of more than two years is recommended in an attempt to detect
real prevention effects as the literature suggests that follow up of this length is
required in order to ascertain prevention effects (Humphries & Keenan, 2012).
Given our limited understanding of the aetiologial models for anxiety in preschoolers
the inclusion of measures such as parenting behaviour and parent-child interactional
processes is also recommended. Given the importance of the relationship between
childhood anxiety and parental attitude further research is required to assess whether
changes in emotional regulation mediates changes in anxiety. This study demonstrates
that a low costs, universal intervention is effective at reducing anxiety and at the same
30
time addresses the multitude of barriers children and families face when accessing
help. 