Search in:
        
            
                 This Journal
            
            
            
            
        
        
         Anywhere
        


        

        

        

        

        
     Advanced search
Journal of Peace Education
Volume 11, 2014 - Issue 1
Submit an article Journal homepage
Full access
2,582
Views
14
CrossRef citations to date
0
Altmetric
Listen
Articles
The effects of conflict resolution education on conflict resolution skills, social competence, and aggression in Turkish elementary school students
Serap Akgun
& Arzu Araz
Pages 30-45 | Received 05 Jun 2012, Accepted 13 Jan 2013, Published online: 20 Apr 2013
Cite this article https://doi-org.utrechtuniversity.idm.oclc.org/10.1080/17400201.2013.777898
In this article
Method
Results
Discussion
Notes on contributors
Acknowledgements
References
Full Article Figures & data References Citations Metrics Reprints & Permissions View PDF
Share
Abstract
The purpose of the study was to implement ‘we can resolve our conflicts’ training program to elementary school students and to assess the effectiveness of this school-based conflict resolution training program, designed to enhance students’ conflict resolution skills and social competence and consequently decrease aggression. Three hundred and ninety-four elementary school students participated in the study. The training group consisted of 327 students and the control group consisted of 67 students. A pretest–posttest control group design was used. The training students received the conflict resolution training two times a week in 40 min sessions over a 10-week period. The conflict resolution training program included empathy, anger management, social problem solving, and cooperative conflict resolution skills. Before and after the training, both training and control groups were assessed in terms of their conflict resolution skills, social competence, and reactive and proactive aggression levels. Results indicated that the conflict resolution training increased students’ constructive conflict resolution skills and social competence and consequently decreased reactive and proactive aggression levels.
Keywords:
conflict resolution trainingaggressionelementary school
School violence is a serious issue in many societies. Survey research indicates that approximately a quarter of all children have been harassed and victimized by their peers (e.g. Hunt
2007; Liang, Flisher, and Lombard
2007; Marcus
2005; Olweus
1994; Pişkin
2003; Slee
1995). Kapçı (
2004) has investigated school violence in Turkey, with fourth and fifth year students and found that 40% of the students experienced physical or emotional violence. Specifically, the results indicated that 44% of the students reported ‘sometimes being hit’, 20% ‘sometimes being slapped or kicked’ by a friend. More than half of the students reported name calling and nearly half of the students reported being sworn and teased. In a similar study by Pişkin (
2003) it was found that 34% of the elementary school students were bullied physically, 29% were bullied verbally, and 21% were bullied indirectly. Students also reported that they experienced bullying, mostly in the classrooms and by their classmates. Research has consistently revealed that peer victimization is a common and urgent problem in our schools.
Peer violence between children has usually been underestimated or ignored by adults. However, violence has severe consequences for victims, witnesses, and perpetrators (Duncan
1999; Furlong and Morrison
1994; Jonson-Reid
1998; Kapçı
2004; Kumpulainen and Räsänen
2000; Liang et al.
2007; Olweus
1993; Rigby and Slee
1999). These experiences can have immediate and long-term consequences since those who experience violence also may encounter significant psychological, social, and behavioral consequences that extent far beyond their risk of physical injuries. Victims of peer violence have a tendency to have lower levels self-esteem and self-responsibility, may be anxious, oversensitive, insecure, and quiet (Björkqvist, Ekman, and Lagerspetz
1982; Gilmartin
1987; Nansel et al.
2004; Olweus
1993,
1994). Victims were less happy at school and in the classroom and they were lonelier. Peer victimization was also related with suicidal ideation (Rigby
2000; Rigby and Slee
1999; Smith and Shu
2000). Youth violence has also negative impact for its perpetrators. Aggressive behavior in childhood predicts later delinquency, substance abuse, depression, and school dropout (Beland
1996; Cairns et al.
1989). Longitudinal research has consistently revealed that aggressive children are at increased risk for engaging in violent behavior in adolescence (Harachi et al.
2006; Keltikangas-Järvinen
2001; Kokko et al.
2006) and in adulthood (Farrington
1995; Huesmann, Dubow, and Boxer
2009).
The literature clearly demonstrates that peer violence is a serious and pervasive problem. Therefore, a conflict resolution program for primary school students, based on the Social Interdependence Theory (Deutsch
2000) and Social Information Processing Model (Crick and Dodge
1994), was developed. The present study evaluates the impact of this school-based conflict resolution training program designed to reduce school violence by teaching students peaceful conflict resolution techniques. It was hypothesized that students in the training group, compared with those in the control group, would report greater improvements in social competence and conflict resolution skills and greater reductions in aggressive behavior.
Social interdependence theory and conflict resolution
Conflict is described as an incompatibility of needs, motives, wishes or demands (Bodine and Crawford
1998). Conflict occurs naturally in children’s social relationships and contributes children’s social, emotional, moral, and cognitive development (Johnson and Johnson
2001; Sandy and Cochran
2000). It may be a constructive or destructive process depending on how it is managed. A constructive conflict resolution is an opportunity for learning, understanding, and personal growth; however, destructive conflict resolution harms individuals (Deutsch
1994,
2000).
According to Deutsch’s (
1973,
2000,
2001) Social Interdependence Theory, there are two approaches to conflict: competitive and cooperative. Competition results in using coercion, threat, power, and deception; poor communication; hostile attitudes; jeopardizing differences; and minimizing similarities in beliefs, values, attitudes, and so on. Cooperation, opposed to competition, leads to perceived similarities in beliefs, values, and attitudes; friendly attitudes; openness in communication; readiness to help; and sensitivity to mutual gain.
Unfortunately, children tend to resolve their conflicts by fighting or withdrawing because they are not taught constructive conflict resolution strategies. Several studies revealed that the most preferred strategies among Turkish students are physical violence, verbal violence, and telling the teacher (Türnüklü, Öztürk, and Şahin
2002; Türnüklü and Şahin,
2004). School violence appears to be associated with a tendency to resolve conflicts in destructive ways.
Children and adolescence without the skills and competencies to resolve conflicts are at increased risk for violence perpetration and victimization (Lochman and Dodge
1994). To teach students to resolve their own conflicts peacefully, a number of conflict resolution education programs were developed (e.g. Davidson and Wood
2004; Johnson and Johnson
1995; Lantieri
1995; Sandy and Boardman
2000). Despite of the differences in their contents, all conflict resolution educations have two main purposes. The first one is to make the schools safe and caring environments where students have an opportunity to learn without any threat and maximize their potentials. The second one is to socialize children so that they can have necessary skills to resolve the conflicts they have for the rest of their lives (Johnson and Johnson
2004). Thus, it would be possible to create peaceful generations and peaceful societies.
A number of school-based peace training programs for elementary school students have documented promising findings of program effectiveness. For example, Johnson and his colleagues (Johnson, Johnson, and Dudley
1992) examined the effect of Teaching Students To Be Peacemakers program and found that trained students were more likely to negotiate and less likely to go to the teacher than untrained students. They also reported that trained students were more likely to use the steps of integrative negotiation compared to controls. Johnson and his colleagues conducted 17 studies testing the effectiveness of conflict resolution training (Johnson and Johnson
1995,
2001; Johnson et al.
1994; Johnson et al.
1995). They consistently found that students learned constructive conflict resolution and transferred their knowledge and skills to their actual life settings.
Research suggests that conflict resolution programs not only increase students’ constructive conflict resolution skills but also reduce their aggression and violence. For example, a study (Metis
1997, cited in Selfridge
2004) assessing the effectiveness of Resolving Conflict Creatively Program in Atlanta revealed that 64% of the teachers reported less physical violence in the classroom and 75% of the teachers reported an increase in student cooperation. Also, 92% of the students felt better about themselves.
Flannery and his colleagues (
2003) evaluated the effects of Peace Builders program and reported decrease in aggression and increase in social competence of the students. In another study (Shapiro et al.
2002) examining the effectiveness of Peacemakers program, it was found decreases in self-reported and teacher-reported aggressive behaviors as well as decreases in the number of disciplinary incidents following program implementation. Similarly, Grossman and his colleagues (
1997) examined the effects of Second Step program on aggression and prosocial behaviors of second and third grade students. Behavioral observations revealed that physical aggression decreased and prosocial behaviors increased among students in the training group but not in the control group.
Meta-analytic studies examining the effectiveness of school-based bullying prevention programs have found mixed results. Some of these studies (Ferguson et al.
2007) concluded that school-based antibullying programs had little effect on school bullying. On the other hand, a recent meta-analysis including 89 studies by Ttofi and Farrington (
2011) indicated that majority of these programs have been effective in reducing school violence. They found that bullying decreased an average of 20–23% and victimization decreased an average of 17–20% in intervention groups vs. control groups.
A growing body of research suggests that conflict resolution programs are successful in teaching conflict resolution skills and reducing violence. However, conflict resolution educations are not common in Turkey and there are very few studies that examine the effectiveness of conflict resolution training, especially in elementary school. Türnüklü and his colleagues (
2010a) examined the effectiveness of a conflict resolution and peer mediation training on Turkish elementary school students’ aggression levels. The results revealed that the training led to a decrease in aggression levels of boys but not in girls. Similarly, in another study of the researchers (Türnüklü et al.
2010b) it was found that trained boys exhibited a significant decrease in forcing behaviors and an increase in integrative/constructive strategies, whereas trained girls did not.
Social information processing model
Social Information Processing Model (Crick and Dodge
1994) proposes six cognitive steps that children take to solve social problems. These are: (a) encoding of social cues, (b) interpretation of social cues, (c) selection of a goal, (d) response access or construction, (e) evaluation of possible responses and selection of a response, and (f) behavioral enactment.
Aggression occurs as a function of cognitive biases and deficits at one or more of these stages. Aggressive behavior was associated with a tendency to interpret ambiguous social cues as hostile (Orobio de Castro et al.
2002), the generation of aggressive responses to social conflict (Dodge et al.
1997), confidence in enacting aggressive behaviors (Dodge et al.
1997), and positive outcome expectancies for aggressive behavior (Smithmyer, Hubbard, and Simons
2000). For example, Dodge (
1980) has reported that aggressive children attribute to the hostile intention 50% more than the children who are nonaggressive. Similarly, in a study (Keltikangas-Järvinen
2001) comparing aggressive and social children it was found that the problem-solving strategies of children from these two groups were different. Social children made better causal analysis, saw the results of their behavior more clearly, and produced more constructive alternatives, compared to aggressive children. Aggressive children and social children were not different in producing aggressive strategies in the face of provocation, but aggressive children could not produce alternative ways to aggression.
Crick and Dodge (
1996) proposed a dichotomy of aggression as reactive aggression and proactive aggression. Reactive aggression is defined as an angry reaction to perceived threat or provocation while proactive aggression is conceptualized as a pattern of unprovoked, calm, planned, deliberate, and goal-directed behavior. Reactively and proactively aggressive children have different biases and deficits in social information processing (Crick and Dodge
1994,
1996; Crick and Ladd
1990; Dodge and Coie
1987). In general, it was observed that reactive-aggressive children demonstrated hostile attributional bias when they have faced with ambiguous provocations and they made mistakes in interpreting the intention when they have experienced accidental provocations (Dodge and Coie
1987; Dodge and Somberg
1987; Dodge et al.
2003).
Proactive-aggressive children tend to evaluate the verbal and physical aggression more positively and care about forming good relationships less than the other children (Crick and Dodge
1996). They are expecting more positive results from their aggressive behaviors compared to their nonaggressive peers, and they are more confident in behaving aggressively (Crick and Ladd
1990).
Components of we can resolve our conflicts training program
We Can Resolve Our Conflicts education program was developed to meet the need for a school-based approach to promoting constructive conflict resolution skills development in Turkish elementary school students (Akgün and Araz
2010). The program begins with the activities aiming to increase empathetic skills such as, mood labeling, reading emotional expressions, and active listening because the research on aggression suggests that empathy is inversely related to aggression and antisocial behaviors, and that acquisition of emphatic skills can reduce aggressive behaviors (Björkqvist, Österman, and Kaukiainen
2000; Bohnert, Crnic, and Lim
2003; Gini et al.
2007; Kalliopuska and Titinen
1991; Kaukiainen et al.
1999; Miller and Eisenberg
1988; Warden and MacKinnon
2003). Another component of the program is anger management. Anger has been associated with aggression. For example, in a study (Bohnert et al.
2003) examining the relationship between aggressive behavior and anger, it was observed that aggressive children feel anger more frequently and more strongly. Only the children who can manage angry feelings can initiate and maintain constructive conflict resolution process; therefore, We Can Resolve Our Conflicts program aims to teach children how they cope with their anger constructively.
Similar to many other conflict resolution programs, ‘We can resolve our conflicts’ has been grounded on the Social Interdependence Theory, by Morton Deutsch (
2000), as well as on the Social Information Processing Model, by Crick and Dodge (
1994). The program aims to teach a cooperative social problem-solving approach rather than competition. Basic principles of cooperation; (a) win/win solution, (b) shifting from ‘I versus you’ to ‘we versus the problem’ approach, (c) effective communication, (d) focusing on understanding of the problem (e) accepting responsibility, and (f) generating a mutually acceptable solutions.
To decrease students’ reactive and proactive aggression levels, ‘We can resolve our conflicts’ program has been designed to include activities aiming to improve the deficiencies and difficulties pointed out in the Social Information Processing Model. Through the education program, it was aimed to reduce the hostile attributional bias, which leads to reactive aggression, by teaching students to be aware of accidental cues and to distinguish between intentional and accidental acts. To reduce proactive aggression, activities of emphasizing the importance of friendship, thinking on possible negative results of aggressive behaviors, and producing alternative solutions for interpersonal conflicts are included in the program.
Effectiveness of the first version of the program was tested with students from low-educated and low-income families (Akgün, Araz, and Karadağ
2007). Results indicated that the conflict resolution training increased students’ constructive conflict resolution skills. It was also found that trained students exhibited a significant decrease in aggression and problem behaviors, with an exception of third grades, whereas untrained students did not. We Can Resolve Our Conflicts program was revised in line with the comments and feedback of teachers and students.
The current study was an attempt to assess the impact of ‘We Can Resolve Our Conflicts’ program on students’ conflict resolution skills, social competence, reactive and proactive aggression. Based on the goal of the program, it was hypothesized that training students, compared with those in the control group, would demonstrate greater increases in their conflict resolution skills and social competence. It was also expected that training students would exhibit decreased reactive and proactive aggression.
Method
Sample
This study was conducted in two private elementary schools in Mersin, Turkey. One of these schools was attended as training group and the other as control. The sample included 394 students from second through fifth grade, with an age range of 7.5–11 years. The training group consisted of 327 students (173 males and 154 females). The control group consisted of 67 students (38 males and 29 females). Students were from middle or high socioeconomic status backgrounds.
Measures
Measure of conflict resolution skill was collected from the students, whereas social competence and aggression measures were collected from the classroom teachers. Second grade students were interviewed and their responses were reported by the researchers. The students were told that there was no right or wrong answer. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the conflict resolution training, the following measures were administered before the training began and immediately after the training ended.
Conflict scenarios: Students’ conflict resolution skills were assessed by three different conflict scenarios about queuing, game preferences, and sharing a book. Students were asked to write out how they would do in these situations. A sample of the conflict scenarios is ‘You are hungry and you go to the canteen to buy a sandwich. Just you are asking for a sandwich another student bumps your shoulder and cuts in front of you.’
A content analysis on students’ responses to the conflict scenarios was performed. Five categories were determined for the queuing conflict: (a) Aggressive responses (e.g. fighting, pushing, and yelling), (b) telling the teacher, (c) submissive responses, (d) stating what she/he wants, and (e) stating what she/he wants with appropriate explanations or seeking a fair solution.
Responses to the game preferences and sharing a book conflicts were coded into six categories; (a) Aggressive responses (e.g. fighting, pushing, and yelling), (b) egocentric responses (e.g. ‘I get the book first’), (c) telling the teacher, (d) submissive responses, (e) trying to persuade, and (f) suggesting fair solutions.
Then, the categories were scored from 0 to 2. For the queuing scenario, the category of ‘stating wants’ scored as 1 and ‘stating wants with appropriate explanations’ scored as 2, other responses were given 0 because these are incorrect responses. For the ‘game preferences’ and ‘sharing a book’ scenarios, the category of ‘trying to persuade’ scored as 1, ‘suggesting fair solutions’ scored as 2, and other responses scored as 0. Thus, each student had a score ranged from 0 to 6 indicating their conflict resolution skills.
All students’ written responses were coded independently by two researchers who have no information about the condition of the student. Analysis of inter-rater agreement using the Kappa Statistics showed good agreement between raters in coding student responses (Kappa coefficients were between .66 and .88).
Social competence: Students’ social competence was measured using Teacher version of the Social Competence Scale developed by Conduct Disorder Prevention Research Group (SCS-T;
2004). The SCS-T consists of 25 statements describing a variety of behavior that a child may display at school. Teachers are required to rate how well each statement describes the student on a five-point Likert scale (1 = not at all, 5 = very well). The SCS-T has three subscales: Prosocial/Communication Skills (e.g. ‘helpful to others’), Emotional Regulation Skills (e.g. ‘Expresses needs and feelings appropriately’), and Academic Skills (e.g. ‘Functions well even with distractions’). A score for the combined Prosocial/Communication and Emotional Regulation items could be calculated as well as the subscale scores and a total social competence score (Corrigan
2003). Academic competence is not the interest of the present study; therefore, academic items were excluded and a combined score of prosocial and emotional subscales, including 19 items, was used as the measure of social competence. Corrigan (
2003) has reported significant internal consistency for combined prosocial and emotional score (Cronbach’s Alpha = .97).
The original Social Competence Scale was first translated from English into Turkish by the researchers. Thereafter, researchers collaborated to correct linguistic and grammatical errors. Then, another translator translated the Turkish version back into English. Virtually, no differences were discerned between the two English versions of the SCS-T. Ten classroom teachers were asked to fill out the Turkish version of the scale for one of their students and to evaluate clarity of the instruction, wording, and statements. All teachers gave positive feedbacks and reported that the scale is clear and understandable. The Alpha coefficient for the internal reliability of this scale in the present study was .96 for the pretest and .97 for the posttest. A significant negative correlation existed with the social competence and reactive aggression (r = −.67 for pretest and r = −.69 for posttest, p < .01) as well as proactive aggression (r = −.55 for pretest and r = −.59 for posttest, p < .01) in the present sample.
Reactive and proactive aggression: Students’ reactive and proactive aggressions were assessed by Teacher’s Check List (Dodge and Coie
1987). The measure consists of six items, three for each scale. An example of reactive item is ‘When this child has been teased or threatened, she or he gets angry easily and strikes back’ and an example of proactive item is ‘This child gets other kids to gang up on a peer that he or she does not like’. Teachers rated students’ aggressive behaviors on a five-point Likert scale ranging from 0 = never true to 4 = almost always true. The scale has already been translated into Turkish in a previous study (Akgün, Araz, and Karadağ
2007) and good internal consistency (Cronbach’s Alpha = .91) has been reported. Turkish version of the scale was significantly and positively correlated with the Conduct Problems Subscale of Conners’ Teacher Rating Scale (r = .72 for reactive and .71 for proactive). In the present sample, the Cronbach alphas were found to be in between .89 and .94.
Training program
‘We Can Resolve Our Conflicts’ program was developed by the researchers based on the theories of empathy, anger management, social information processing, social problem solving, social interdependence, and integrative negotiation. In the first part of the training, students were taught a number of essential skills for conflict resolution. Those are: being aware of their own feelings, understanding others’ emotions, empathizing and trying to understand others’ point of view, expressing emotions and demands in nonaggressive ways, active listening, cooperation, and anger management. Then, the students were trained about the nature of conflict, possible responses to conflict, and the consequences of aggressive, submissive, and constructive responses. Finally, students were taught the problem-solving integrative negotiation procedure consisting of six steps; (1) If you are angry, cool off, (2) state what you want and how you feel with the reasons for your wants and feelings, (3) listen carefully and try to understand others’ perspectives, (4) identify the problem, (5) brainstorm to find out solutions together, and (6) choose a solution that satisfies both parties. The program utilized materials interesting for children, such as photos, cartoons, posters, and stories and different didactic techniques, such as pen and paper activities, class discussions, plays, role-plays, and drama.
Procedure
The Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey approved this research. Letters introducing the study and the conflict resolution training and requesting permission were sent to parents by the school principals. After obtaining permission to conduct the study from the parents, school principals, and teachers, a pretest assessment was carried out at the beginning of the spring semester. Second, the conflict resolution program was implemented with the training group. The training school received the training twice a week in 40 min sessions over 10 weeks period, whereas control group did not receive this conflict resolution training. Education was delivered by nine psychology third and fourth year students who received training on theoretical and methodological aspects of the conflict and conflict resolution education given by the researchers. Teachers were asked to apply the conflict resolution lessons into everyday classroom problems by prompting, reinforcing, and reminding constructive strategies. After the training, both training and control groups were assessed in terms of their use of conflict resolution strategies, social competence, and aggression.
Results
A pretest–posttest control group design was used to determine changes in students’ conflict resolution skills, social competence, and aggression levels. Means and standard deviations of each variable for training and control groups are presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Means and standard deviations of the measures for training and control groups.
Download CSVDisplay Table
First, independent samples t-tests were performed to assess the equivalence of training and control groups in the pretest phase concerning the dependent variables. No significant differences were observed between the two groups in conflict resolution skills (t(392) = 1.25, p > .05). Hence, training and control groups had similar level of conflict resolution skills. However, results revealed statistically significant a priori differences on social competence (t(82) = 4.23, p < .01), reactive aggression (t(392) = 4.45, p < .01), and proactive aggression (t(88) = 4.38, p < .01) measures between the two groups.
To control group differences on the means of the pretest, one way analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) were conducted using group (intervention vs. control) as the independent variable, posttest score as the dependent variable, and pretest scores as the covariate. There was no significant main or interaction effect of gender on posttest scores; therefore, gender was removed from the analysis. Due to unequal sizes of training and control groups, the group means were equally weighted in the analyses, using type III sums of squares for the calculation of the F statistics (Tabachnick and Fidell
2007). The assumption of homogeneity of regression slopes for analysis of covariance was tested examining whether there was an interaction between the independent variable and covariates on posttest measures. The results indicated that the assumption of homogeneity of regression slopes was met in all cases (p > .05), with an exception of the social competence (p < .05). Thus, social competence pretest scores revealed an interaction between group and pretest social competence on posttest social competence.
An analysis of covariance with the pretest conflict resolution skill as a covariate revealed a significant difference in the posttest scores F(1,391) = 30.68, p < .01, partial η2 = .07. Training students’ responses to the conflict scenarios (4.36) were significantly more constructive at posttest than control group (3.27).
As presented in Table 2, an ANCOVA of the teacher rating social competence posttest scores, with pretest scores entered as covariate, proved to be significant, F(1,391) = 15.08, p < .01, partial η2 = .04; the adjusted means of the training group (75.14) were significantly higher than those of the control group (70.33). Due to the assumption that homogeneity of regression slopes was not met for social competence variable, a 2 (training-control group) × 2 (pretest–posttest) factorial analysis of variance, in which the last variable involved repeated measures, was performed. Univariate F tests indicated that the interaction between training-control group and pretest–posttest was significant on social competence F(1,392) = 5.25, p < .03, partial η2 = .013. To examine the nature of this interaction, pretest scores were compared to posttest scores by t-tests. Training students’ scores on social competence significantly increased from pretest (74.31) to posttest (76.34), t(326) = 4.34, p < .01. Untrained students’ scores, however, were not differed from pretest (65.28) to posttest (64.43), t(66) = .54, p > .05. Both, the results of ANCOVA and repeated measure ANOVA suggest a statistically significant impact of the training on social competence of the students.
Table 2. Analyses of covariance.
Download CSVDisplay Table
The ANCOVA of the reactive aggression showed significant effects for training F(1,391) = 6.33, p < .02, partial η2 = .02; adjusted posttest means for the training group (4.04) were significantly lower than those for the control group (4.80).
Using the proactive aggression pretest scores as covariate, the adjusted mean for the training group was significantly lower on the posttest scores F(1,391) = 5.87, p < .01, partial η2 = .02. Adjusted mean scores were 1.70 for the training group and 2.31 for the control group.
Discussion
The main purpose of the present study was to assess the efficacy and feasibility of a school-based conflict resolution training program, designed to enhance elementary school students’ conflict resolution skills and social competence and consequently decrease aggression. Coleman and Fisher-Yoshida (
2004) state that even though the program evaluation studies are invaluable in determining and monitoring the incentives of change in individual and system level, they neglect collecting the data required for evaluating the conflict resolution educations applied in schools. Therefore, in the present study, the efficacy of the program was also tested besides preparing a conflict resolution education appropriate for Turkish culture.
It was expected that ‘We Can Resolve Our Conflicts’ program would improve conflict resolution skills of the training students. Results provided support for this hypothesis by revealing that when the pretest conflict resolution scores were controlled, the posttest scores of the training students was significantly higher than those of the control group. This result is consistent with the findings of our previous study (Akgün, Araz, and Karadağ
2007) examining the effectiveness of ‘We Can Resolve Our Conflicts’ program. The findings of the present study as the other studies in the literature (Grossman et al.
1997; Johnson and Johnson
2001; Shapiro et al.
2002; Stevahn, Munger, and Kealey
2005) indicated that constructive conflict resolution strategies could be taught to primary school students.
It was anticipated the conflict resolution training would lead to enhancement in students’ social competencies including communication skills and emotional regulation skills. In line with these expectations, it was found that the social competencies of the training group were increased from pretest to posttest.
Based on the Social Information Progressing Model, ‘We Can Resolve Our Conflicts’ program targets to decrease the levels of hostile attributional bias, thus the reactive aggression levels of the students. When the pretest reactive aggression scores of the students were controlled, it was found that the posttest reactive aggression scores of the training group was significantly lower than the scores of control group. These findings suggest that the training program is effective in reducing the reactive aggression.
‘We Can Resolve Our Conflicts’ program targets to reduce the problems referred by social information processing model, such as not being able to develop alternative solutions, preferring aggressive behaviors to resolve conflict, and cognitive problems about choosing the right behavior, consequently to reduce the proactive aggression. As a result of the covariance analysis conducted by controlling the pretest proactive aggression scores of the students, it was observed that the posttest proactive aggression scores of the students in training group was significantly lower than the scores of the students in the control group. The results of the present study indicated that the program was effective in reducing aggression. Consistent with the studies in Western cultures, the impact of conflict resolution training on increasing social competence and reducing aggression was supported in a non-Western culture.
Aggressive behaviors of children are not generally approved, but teaching alternative ways to aggression is also very important (Keltikangas-Järvinen and Kangas
1988). In fact, without any education, not just the children but also the adults lack the necessary skills to see the alternative solutions and making positive choices (Deutsch
1994; Johnson and Johnson
1995). For this reason, it is important to teach children what they should do while stating what they should not do. The conflict resolution training programs reduce aggression by teaching resolving conflicts, presenting concrete examples, and demonstrating children how they should behave.
Childhood aggression is not only a process experienced in school years and impeding learning; the problem also continues when the children grow up to be adults; therefore, early interventions are important. Findings of the research indicate that the aggressive behaviors are quite stable. For example, in a seven years’ longitudinal study (Keltikangas-Järvinen
2001), children, ages 10–11 years, were divided into two categories as aggressive and sociable based on peer ratings and then they were reevaluated in their adolescence ages. The results showed that 80% of the students stayed in their own categories, the aggressive children became aggressive adolescents and the sociable children became sociable adolescents. The author emphasized that it is almost impossible to move from the aggressive category to the sociable.
In a similar manner, the social information processing model suggests that aggressive behaviors are controlled by the social problem-solving patterns shaped in early ages. If we do not teach constructive conflict resolution strategies in childhood, it would be harder to change destructive behaviors in adulthood. Researchers (Clayton, Ballif-Spanvill, and Hunsaker
2001) have emphasized that the educational programs designed to prevent violence should be administered in elementary school ages because the individual and social skills targeted by violence prevention programs begins to be shaped during elementary school ages and children are more likely to be influenced by adult figures, such as teacher and parents, compared to adolescents.
It appears that school-based prevention programs are successful in reducing school violence. Not just the aggressive children but all the students to attend conflict resolution training programs are very important. According to the social learning theory, the possibility of reoccurrence increases when aggression is rewarded. Aggressive behaviors of the aggressive child will be reinforced with the submission of the other children. Since school-based conflict resolution programs aim to teach constructive conflict resolution instead of submission to all the students, the risk of reinforcing the aggression of aggressive children by their peers is inhibited.
Limitations of the study and future directions
There are a number of limitations of the present study that need to be acknowledged. First, ‘We Can Resolve Our Conflicts’ program was administered by trained psychology students. We believe that the education would be more effective if it was administered by the classroom teachers. They spend more time with their students; therefore, they have more chance to motivate the students to practice the skills, to apply the knowledge to real conflicts in school, and to remind students the principles of conflict resolution. Second, the parents were not involved in the conflict resolution program. To increase the effectiveness of the training, parents should also be educated on how to resolve their conflicts with their children constructively. Third, we did not collect follow-up data on whether positive outcomes of the program were sustained long term. Further replication studies should be conducted to determine the long-term effectiveness of the program in reducing aggression. Finally, in the present study we have used a quantitative approach rather than qualitative. Further, research using a qualitative approach is needed to understand teachers’ and children’s own evaluations of the conflict resolution training.
In general, the findings of this study pointed out that ‘We Can Resolve Our Conflicts’ education program enhanced the conflict resolution skills and social competencies of the students and reduced the level of their aggressive behaviors, even in a short amount of time. In our opinion, providing a more sophisticated conflict resolution education depending on the cognitive and social development of the students for 12 years will enable the children to internalize conflict resolution principles and to practice the constructive conflict resolution skills.
The Turkish educational system is highly competitive; therefore, academic skills of the students have been more focused rather than their social and emotional skills. The contemporary educational programs targeting to develop social and emotional skills of the students are not well known and still traditional methods such as giving advice, refereeing between two parties, or punishments are used. It is clear that achieving academic success in an insecure environment is not possible. Our educational system requires reducing the violence in schools and providing a safe, secure, and caring environment. There is, therefore, a great need to develop culturally appropriate violence prevention programs, such as conflict resolution, bullying prevention, peer mediation, and anger management, and to train pre-service and in-service teachers and school principals how to implement these programs in the classroom and school. Violence prevention and intervention programs should be a part of educational system. In this way, it will be possible to create peaceful societies composed of individuals who internalize the culture of peace.
Notes on contributors
Serap Akgün, PhD, is an associate professor in the Department of Psychology at Mersin University, Turkey. She teaches courses in research methods, social psychology, group psychology, and interpersonal conflict and peace. She received BSc and MSc in psychology from Hacettepe University in Turkey. She received her PhD from Wollongong University in Australia. Her primary areas of research include interpersonal and inter group conflict, conflict resolution, aggression, and coping with stress.
Arzu Araz, PhD, is an assistant professor in the Department of Psychology at Mersin University. She teaches courses in social psychology, communication psychology, and interpersonal psychology. She received her BSc, MSc, and PhD from Ege University in Turkey. Her research interests include conflict resolution, self-presentation, emotional expressions, and health behaviors.
Acknowledgments
This research study was supported by the Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey (Türkiye Bilimsel ve Teknik Araştırma Kurumu; TUBITAK). Grant Number: 106K366.
Related Research Data
Youth Violence in Everyday Life
Source: Journal of Interpersonal Violence
Peer Group Antecedents of Severe Love‐shyness in Males
Source: Journal of Personality
Effects of peer victimization in schools and perceived social support on adolescent well-being
Source: Journal of Adolescence
Constructive Conflict Resolution: Principles, Training, and Research
Source: Journal of Social Issues
Trajectories of Prosocial Behavior and Physical Aggression in Middle Childhood: Links to Adolescent School Dropout and Physical Violence
Source: Journal of Research on Adolescence
Bullies and victims: Their ego picture, ideal ego picture and normative ego picture
Source: Scandinavian Journal of Psychology
Evaluation of the peacemakers program: School‐based violence prevention for students in grades four through eight
Source: Psychology in the Schools
Social intelligence − empathy = aggression?
Source: Aggression and Violent Behavior
Hostile Attributional Biases among Aggressive Boys Are Exacerbated under Conditions of Threats to the Self
Source: Child Development
The relation of empathy to aggressive and externalizing/antisocial behavior.
Source: Psychological Bulletin
Influence of Two Developmental Programmes on the Empathy and Prosociability of Preschool Children
Source: Perceptual and Motor Skills
Does empathy predict adolescents' bullying and defending behavior?
Source: Aggressive Behavior
Effectiveness of school-based programs to reduce bullying: a systematic and meta-analytic review
Source: Journal of Experimental Criminology
Implementing the &quot;Teaching Students to be Peacemakers Program&quot;
Source: Theory Into Practice
Children involved in bullying at elementary school age: their psychiatric symptoms and deviance in adolescence
Source: Child Abuse & Neglect
Children's perceptions of the outcomes of social strategies: Do the ends justify being mean?
Source: Developmental Psychology
Teaching students to be peacemakers: Results of five years of research.
Source: Peace and Conflict Journal of Peace Psychology
Social Information-Processing Mechanisms in Reactive and Proactive Aggression
Source: Child Development
Preventing violence and teaching peace: A review of promising and effective antiviolence, conflict-resolution, and peace programs for elementary school children
Source: Applied and Preventive Psychology
The Effect of an Education Program on Attitudes and Beliefs about Bullying and Bullying Behaviour in Junior Secondary School Students
Source: Child and Adolescent Mental Health
The Resolving Conflict Creatively Program: How We Know It Works
Source: Theory Into Practice
Conflict Resolution in a French Immersion Elementary School
Source: The Journal of Educational Research
THE PEACEFUL KIDS CONFLICT RESOLUTION PROGRAM
Source: International Journal of Conflict Management
Training Elementary School Students to Manage Conflict
Source: The Journal of Social Psychology
İlköğretim Öğrencilerinin Zorbalığa Maruz Kalma Türünün ve Sıklığının Depresyon, Kaygı ve Benlik Saygısıyla İlişkisi
Source: Ankara Üniversitesi Eğitim Bilimleri Fakültesi Dergisi
Emotional competence and aggressive behavior in school-age children.
Source: Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology
Hostile Attribution of Intent and Aggressive Behavior: A Meta‐Analysis
Source: Child Development
The relationships between social intelligence, empathy, and three types of aggression
Source: Aggressive Behavior
Introduction to Miniseries: School Violence and Safety in Perspective
Source: School Psychology Review
Bullying, violence, and risk behavior in South African school students
Source: Child Abuse & Neglect
Effectiveness of a violence prevention curriculum among children in elementary school. A randomized controlled trial
Source: JAMA
The effects of conflict resolution and peer mediation training on Turkish elementary school students’ conflict resolution strategies
Source: Journal of Peace Education
Youth violence and exposure to violence in childhood
Source: Aggression and Violent Behavior
Problem-solving strategies in aggressive and nonaggressive children
Source: Aggressive Behavior
Continuity of aggression from childhood to early adulthood as a predictor of life outcomes: implications for the adolescent‐limited and life‐course‐persistent models
Source: Aggressive Behavior
Maltreatment by Parents and Peers: The Relationship between Child Abuse, Bully Victimization, and Psychological Distress
Source: Child Maltreatment
Effects of Conflict Resolution Training on Elementary School Students
Source: The Journal of Social Psychology
Peer victimization and its relationship to depression among Australian primary school students
Source: Personality and Individual Differences
The Effectiveness of School-Based Anti-Bullying Programs
Source: Criminal Justice Review
Suicidal Ideation among Adolescent School Children, Involvement in Bully—Victim Problems, and Perceived Social Support
Source: Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior
A Conflict Resolution Model
Source: Theory Into Practice
Cooperation and conflict resolution: Implications for consulting psychology.
Source: Consulting Psychology Journal Practice and Research
The Resolution of Conflict
Source: American Behavioral Scientist
Bullying at School: Basic Facts and Effects of a School Based Intervention Program
Source: Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry
Peer Rejection and Social Information‐Processing Factors in the Development of Aggressive Behavior Problems in Children
Source: Child Development
What Good Schools can Do About Bullying
Source: Childhood
Social Cognition and Children's Aggressive Behavior
Source: Child Development
Proactive and Reactive Aggression in Delinquent Adolescents: Relations to Aggression Outcome Expectancies
Source: Journal of Clinical Child Psychology
A Schoolwide Approach to Violence Prevention
Source: Unknown Repository
Social-cognitive processes of severly violent, moderately aggressive, and nonaggressive boys.
Source: Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
The Twelfth Jack Tizard Memorial Lecture *
Source: Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry
The Resolution of Conflict
Source: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A (General)
Initial behavior outcomes for the PeaceBuilders universal school-based violence prevention program.
Source: Developmental Psychology
Cross-national Consistency in the Relationship Between Bullying Behaviors and Psychosocial Adjustment
Source: Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine
Prosocial children, bullies and victims: An investigation of their sociometric status, empathy and social problem‐solving strategies
Source: British Journal of Developmental Psychology
Aggressive behaviour and social problem‐solving strategies: a review of the findings of a seven‐year follow‐up from childhood to late adolescence
Source: Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health
Conflict Resolution Across the Lifespan: The Work of the ICCCR
Source: Theory Into Practice
A review and reformulation of social information-processing mechanisms in children's social adjustment.
Source: Psychological Bulletin
Reactive and proactive aggression in school children and psychiatrically impaired chronically assaultive youth.
Source: Journal of Abnormal Psychology
Effects of peer mediation training on elementary school students
Source: Mediation Quarterly
Aggressive behavior among girls and boys during middle childhood: predictors and sequelae of trajectory group membership
Source: Aggressive Behavior
Social-information-processing factors in reactive and proactive aggression in children's peer groups.
Source: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology

Linking provided by 
References
Akgün, S., and A. Araz. 2010. Anlaşmazlıklarımızı çözebiliriz: Bir çatışma çözümü eğitim programı [We can resolve our conflicts: A conflict resolution education program]. Ankara: Nobel Yayın Dağıtım.
Google Scholar
Akgün, S., A. Araz, and S. Karadağ. 2007. “Anlaşmazlıklarımızı çözebiliriz: İlköğretim öğrencilerine yönelik bir çatışma çözümü eğitimi ve psiko-sosyal etkileri [We can resolve our conflicts: A conflict resolution education program and its psycho-social effects].” Türk Psikoloji Dergisi 22: 43–62.
Google Scholar
Beland, K. R. 1996. “A School Wide Approach to Violence Prevention.” In Preventing Violence in America, edited by R. L. Hampton, P. Jenkins and T. P. Gullotta, 209–231. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Google Scholar
Björkqvist, K., K. Ekman, and K. Lagerspetz. 1982. “Bullies and Victims: Their Ego Picture, Ideal Ego Picture and Normative Ego Picture.” Scandinavian Journal of Psychology 23: 307–313.
Google Scholar
Björkqvist, K., K. Österman, and A. Kaukiainen. 2000. “Social Intelligence – Empathy = Aggression?” Aggression and Violent Behavior 5: 191–200.
Google Scholar
Bodine, R. J., and D. K. Crawford. 1998. The Handbook of Conflict Resolution Education. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass.
Google Scholar
Bohnert, A. M., K. A. Crnic, and K. G. Lim. 2003. “Emotional Competence and Aggressive Behavior in School-Age Children.” Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 31: 79–91.
Google Scholar
Cairns, R. B., B. D. Cairns, H. J. Neckerman, L. L. Ferguson, and J. L. Gariepy. 1989. “Growth and Aggression: 1. Childhood to Early Adolescence.” Developmental Psychology 25: 320–330.
Google Scholar
Clayton, C. J., B. Ballif-Spanvill, and M. D. Hunsaker. 2001. “Preventing Violence and Teaching Peace: A Review of Promising and Effective Antiviolence, Conflict Resolution, and Peace Programs or Elementary School Children.” Applied and Preventive Psychology 10: 1–35.
Google Scholar
Coleman, P. T., and B. Fisher-Yoshida. 2004. “Conflict Resolution Across the Lifespan: The Work of the ICCCR.” Theory into Practice 43: 31–38.
Google Scholar
Conduct Problem Prevention Research Group. 2004. (accessed June 1, 2006) http//www.fasttrackproject.org.
Google Scholar
Corrigan, A. 2003. Social Competence Scale – Teacher Version. Fast Track Project Technical Report. (accessed June 1, 2006) http//www.fasttrackproject.org.
Google Scholar
Crick, N. R., and K. A. Dodge. 1994. “A Review and Reformulation of Information-Processing Mechanisms in Children’s Social Adjustment.” Psychological Bulletin 115: 75–101.
Google Scholar
Crick, N. R., and K. A. Dodge. 1996. “Social Information-Processing Mechanisms in Reactive and Proactive Aggression.” Child Development 67: 993–1002.
Google Scholar
Crick, N. R., and G. W. Ladd. 1990. “Children’s Perceptions of the Outcomes of Aggressive Strategies: Do the Ends Justify Being Mean?” Developmental Psychology 26: 612–620.
Google Scholar
Davidson, J., and C. Wood. 2004. “A Conflict Resolution Model.” Theory into Practice 43: 6–13.
Google Scholar
Deutsch, M. 1973. The Resolution of Conflict. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Google Scholar
Deutsch, M. 1994. “Constructive Conflict Resolution: Principles, Training, and Research.” Journal of Social Issues 50: 13–32.
Google Scholar
Deutsch, M. 2000. “Cooperation and Competition.” In The Handbook of Conflict Resolution: Theory and Practice, edited by M. Deutsch and P. T. Coleman, 21–40. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass.
Google Scholar
Deutsch, M. 2001. “Cooperation and Conflict Resolution: Implications for Consulting Psychology.” Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research 53: 76–81.
Google Scholar
Dodge, K. A. 1980. “Social Cognitions and Children’s Aggressive Behavior.” Child Development 51: 162–163.
Google Scholar
Dodge, K. A., and J. D. Coie. 1987. “Social-Information Processing Factors in Reactive and Proactive Aggression in Children’s Peer Groups.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 53: 1146–1158.
Google Scholar
Dodge, K. A., J. E. Lansford, V. S. Burks, J. E. Bates, G. S. Pettit, R. Fontaine, et al. 2003. “Peer Rejection and Social Information-Processing Factors in the Development of Aggressive Behavior Problems in Children.” Child Development 74: 374–393.
Google Scholar
Dodge, K. A., J. E. Lochman, J. D. Harnish, J. E. Bates, and J. D. Harnish. 1997. “Reactive and Proactive Aggression in School Children and Psychiatrically Impaired Chronically Assaultive Youth.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 106: 37–51.
Google Scholar
Dodge, K., and D. R. Somberg. 1987. “Hostile Attributional Biases among Aggressive Boys are Exacerbated Under Conditions of Threats to the Self.” Child Development 58: 213–224.
Google Scholar
Duncan, R. D. 1999. “Maltreatment by Parents and Peers: The Relationship Between Child Abuse, Bully Victimization, and Psychological Distress.” Child Maltreatment 4: 45–55.
Google Scholar
Farrington, D. P. 1995. “Development of Offending and Antisocial Behavior from Childhood: Key Findings from the Cambridge Study in Delinquent Development.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 360: 929–964.
Google Scholar
Ferguson, C. J., C. S. Miguel, J. C. Kilburn, and P. Sanchez. 2007. “The Effectiveness of School-Based Anti-Bullying Programs: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Criminal Justice Review 32: 401–414.
Google Scholar
Flannery, D. J., A. T. Vazsonyi, A. K. Liau, S. Guo, K. E. Powell, H. Atha, et al. 2003. “Initial Behavior Outcomes for the Peacebuilders Universal School-Based Violence Prevention Program.” Developmental Psychology 39: 292–308.
Google Scholar
Furlong, M. J., and G. M. Morrison. 1994. “School Violence and Safety in Perspective.” School Psychology Review 23: 139–150.
Google Scholar
Gilmartin, B. G. 1987. “Peer Group Antecedents of Severe Love-Shyness in Males.” Journal of Personality 55: 467–489.
Google Scholar
Gini, G., P. Albiero, B. Benelli, and G. Altoè. 2007. “Does Empathy Predict Adolescents’ Bullying and Defending Behavior?” Aggressive Behavior 33: 467–476.
Google Scholar
Grossman, D. C., H. J. Neckerman, T. D. Koepsell, P. Liu, K. N. Asher, K. Beland, K. Frey, and F. P. Rivara. 1997. “Effectiveness of a Violence Prevention Curriculum Among Children in Elementary School: A Randomized Controlled Trial.” JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association 277: 1605–1611.
Google Scholar
Harachi, T. W., C. B. Fleming, H. R. White, M. E. Ensminger, R. D. Abbot, R. F. Catalano, et al. 2006. “Aggressive Behavior among Girls and Boys During Middle Childhood: Predictors and Sequelae of Trajectory Group Membership.” Aggressive Behavior 32: 279–293.
Google Scholar
Huesmann, L. R., E. F. Dubow, and P. Boxer. 2009. “Continuity of Aggression from Childhood to Early Adulthood as a Predictor of Life Outcomes: Implications for the Adolescent-Limited and Life-Course-Persistent Models.” Aggressive Behavior 35: 136–149.
Google Scholar
Hunt, C. 2007. “The Effect of an Education Program on Attitudes and Beliefs about Bullying and Bullying Behavior in Junior Secondary School Students.” Child and Adolescent Mental Health 12: 21–26.
Google Scholar
Johnson, D. W., and R. Johnson. 2001. “Teaching Students to be Peacemakers: Results of Twelve Years of Research.” Paper presented at annual meeting of the American Education Research Association, Seattle: WA.
Google Scholar
Johnson, D. W., and R. Johnson. 1995. “Teaching Students to be Peacemakers: Results of Five Years of Research.” Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology 1: 417–438.
Google Scholar
Johnson, D. W., and R. Johnson. 2004. “Implementing the ‘Teaching Students to be Peacemakers Program’.” Theory into Practice 43: 68–79.
Google Scholar
Johnson, D. W., R. Johnson, and B. Dudley. 1992. “Effects on Peer Mediation Training on Elementary School Students.” Conflict Resolution Quarterly 10: 89–99.
Google Scholar
Johnson, D. W., R. Johnson, R. Dudley, and K. Acıkgöz. 1994. “Effects of Conflict Resolution Training on Elementary School Students.” Journal of Social Psychology 134: 803–817.
Google Scholar
Johnson, D. W., R. Johnson, B. M. Dudley, and D. Magnuson. 1995. “Training Elementary School Students to Manage Conflict.” Journal of Social Psychology 135: 673–686.
Google Scholar
Jonson-Reid, M. 1998. “Youth Violence and Exposure to Violence in Childhood: An Ecological Review.” Aggression and Violent Behavior 3: 159–179.
Google Scholar
Kalliopuska, M., and U. Titinen. 1991. “Influence of Development Programs on the Empathy and Prosociability of Preschool Children.” Perceptual and Motor Skills 72: 323–328.
Google Scholar
Kapçı, E. G. 2004. “İlköğretim öğrencilerinin zorbalığa maruz kalma türünün ve sıklığının depresyon, kaygı ve benlik saygısı ile ilişkisi [The relationships between being bullied, depression, anxiety, and self-esteem in primary school students].” Ankara Üniversitesi Eğitim Bilimleri Fakültesi Dergisi 37: 1–13.
Google Scholar
Kaukiainen, A., K. Björkqvist, K. M. Lagerspetz, K. Österman, S. Forsblom, and A. Ahlbom. 1999. “The Relationships Between Social Intelligence, Empathy and Three Types of Aggression.” Aggressive Behavior 25: 81–89.
Google Scholar
Keltikangas-Järvinen, L. 2001. “Aggressive Behavior and Social Problem-Solving Strategies: A Review of the Findings of a Seven-Year Follow-Up from Childhood to Late Adolescence.” Criminal Behavior and Mental Health 11: 236–250.
Google Scholar
Keltikangas-Järvinen, L., and P. Kangas. 1988. “Problem Solving Strategies in Aggressive and Nonaggressive Children.” Aggressive Behavior 14: 255–264.
Google Scholar
Kokko, K., R. E. Tremblay, E. Lacourse, D. S. Nagin, and F. Vitaro. 2006. “Trajectories of Prosocial Behavior and Physical Aggression in Middle Childhood: Links to Adolescent School Dropout and Physical Violence.” Journal of Resource on Adolescence 16: 403–428.
Google Scholar
Kumpulainen, K., and E. Räsänen. 2000. “Children Involved in Bullying at Elementary School Age: Their Psychiatric Symptoms and Deviance in Adolescence: An Empirical Sample.” Child Abuse & Neglect 24: 1567–1577.
Google Scholar
Lantieri, L. 1995. “Waging Peace in Our Schools.” Phi Delta Kappan 76: 1–5.
Google Scholar
Liang, H., A. J. Flisher, and C. J. Lombard. 2007. “Bullying, Violence, and Risk Behavior in South African School Students.” Child Abuse & Neglect 31: 161–171.
Google Scholar
Lochman, J. E., and K. A. Dodge. 1994. “Social-Cognitive Processes of Severely Violent, Moderately Aggressive, and Nonaggressive Boys.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 62: 366–374.
Google Scholar
Marcus, R. F. 2005. “Youth Violence in Everyday Life.” Journal of Interpersonal Violence 20: 442–447.
Google Scholar
Metis Associates. 1997. Atlanta RCCP Evaluation of Five Schools. New York, NY: Author.
Google Scholar
Miller, P. A., and N. Eisenberg. 1988. “The Relation of Empathy to Aggressive and Externalizing/Antisocial Behavior.” Psychological Bulletin 103: 324–344.
Google Scholar
Nansel, T. R., W. Craig, M. D. Overpeck, G. Saluja, and W. J. Ruan. 2004. “Cross-National Consistency in the Relationship Between Bullying Behaviors and Psychosocial Adjustment.” Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 158: 730–736.
Google Scholar
Olweus, D. 1993. Bullying at School: What We Know and What We Can Do. Oxford: Blackwell.
Google Scholar
Olweus, D. 1994. “Bullying at School: Basic Facts and Effects of a School Based Intervention Program.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 35: 1171–1190.
Google Scholar
Orobio de Castro, B., J. W. Veerman, W. Koops, J. D. Bosch, and H. J. Monshouwer. 2002. “Hostile Attribution of Intent and Aggressive Behavior: A Meta-Analysis.” Child Development 73: 916–934.
Google Scholar
Pişkin, M. 2003. Okullarımızda yaygın bir sorun: Akran zorbalığı [Bullying: A widespread problem in our schools]. VII. Ulusal Psikolojik Danışma ve Rehberlik Kongresi Bildiri Özetleri. Ankara, Turkey: Pegem A Yayıncılık.
Google Scholar
Rigby, K. 2000. “Effects of Peer Victimization in Schools and Perceived Social Support on Adolescent Well-Being.” Journal of Adolescence 23: 57–68.
Google Scholar
Rigby, K., and P. T. Slee. 1999. “Suicidal Ideation among Adolescent School Children, Involvement in Bully/Victim Problems and Perceived Low Social Support.” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 29: 119–130.
Google Scholar
Sandy, S. V., and S. K. Boardman. 2000. “The Peaceful Kids Conflict Resolution Program.” International Journal of Conflict Management 11: 337–357.
Google Scholar
Sandy, S. V., and K. M. Cochran. 2000. “The Development of Conflict Resolution Skills in Children.” In The Handbook of Conflict Resolution: Theory and Practice, edited by M. Deutsch and P. T. Coleman, 316–342. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass.
Google Scholar
Selfridge, J. 2004. “The Resolving Conflict Creatively Program: How We Know it Works.” Theory into Practice 43: 59–67.
Google Scholar
Shapiro, J. P., J. D. Burgoon, C. J. Welker, and J. B. Clough. 2002. “Evaluation of the Peacemakers Program: School-Based Violence Prevention for Students in Grades Four Through Eight.” Psychology in the Schools 39: 87–100.
Google Scholar
Slee, P. T. 1995. “Peer Victimization and its Relationship to Depression Among Australian Primary School Students.” Personality and Individual Differences 18: 57–62.
Google Scholar
Smith, P. K., and S. Shu. 2000. “What Good Schools Can Do About Bullying: Findings from a Survey in English Schools After a Decade of Research and Action.” Childhood 7: 193–212.
Google Scholar
Smithmyer, C. M., J. A. Hubbard, and R. F. Simons. 2000. “Proactive and Reactive Aggression in Delinquent Adolescents: Relations to Aggression Outcome Expectancies.” Journal of Clinical Child Psychology 29: 86–93.
Google Scholar
Stevahn, L., L. Munger, and K. Kealey. 2005. “Conflict Resolution in a French Immersion Elementary School.” Journal of Educational Research 99: 3–18.
Google Scholar
Tabachnick, B. G., and L. S. Fidell. 2007. “Analysis of Covariance.” In Using Multivariate Statistics, edited by B. G. Tabachnick and L. S. Fidell, 195–240. Boston: Pearson.
Google Scholar
Ttofi, M. M., and D. P. Farrington. 2011. “Effectiveness of School-based Programs to Reduce Bullying: A Systematic and Meta-Analytic Review.” Journal of Experimental Criminology 7: 27–56.
Google Scholar
Türnüklü, A., T. Kaçmaz, S. Gurler, B. Sevkin, F. Türk, A. Kalender, and F. Zengin. 2010a. “The Effects of Conflict Resolution and Peer Mediation Training on Turkish Elementary School Students’ Level of Aggression.” Education 3–13 (38): 13–22.
Google Scholar
Türnüklü, A., T. Kaçmaz, S. Gurler, F. Türk, A. Kalender, F. Zengin, and B. Sevkin. 2010b. “The Effects of Conflict Resolution and Peer Mediation Training on Turkish Elementary School Students’ Conflict Resolution Strategies.” Journal of Peace Education 7: 33–45.
Google Scholar
Türnüklü, A., N. Öztürk, and İ. Şahin. 2002. İlköğretim okullarında, öğrencilerin, öğretmenlerin, okul yönticilerinin ve velilerin çatışma çözüm stratejilerinin incelenmesi [Conflict resolution styles of students, parents, teachers and principals in primary schools]. XII. Ulusal Psikoloji Kongresi Kongre Kitabı. Ankara, Turkey: ODTÜ.
Google Scholar
Türnüklü, A., and İ. Şahin. 2004. “13–14 yaş grubu öğrencilerinin çatışma çözme stratejilerinin incelenmesi[Examining 13-14th years old students’ conflict resolution strategies].” Türk Psikoloji Yazıları 7: 45–61.
Google Scholar
Warden, D., and S. MacKinnon. 2003. “Prosocial Children Bullies and Victims: An Investigation of their Sociometric Status, Empathy and Social Problem Solving Strategies.” British Journal of Developmental Psychology 21: 367–385.
Google Scholar
Download PDF
Related research

People also read
Recommended articles
Cited by
14

In this article
Method
Results
Discussion
Notes on contributors
Acknowledgements
References