ABSTRACT
Across North America concerns have been raised about the social, emotional, and
mental health of our youth. Many primary prevention programs have been proposed to
address these issues, however, few have met the criteria for effective interventions, including
being longitudinal, cross-curricular, emphasizing specific concepts and skills, and being
within the skills and understandings of teachers and the school system at large (McCombs,
2004). The Respecting Diversity (RD) program is a social and emotional learning (SEL)
intervention designed by teachers that uses a Multiple Intelligences (MI) framework to
develop self-awareness, self-respect and respect for diverse others. It teaches skills such as
goal setting, meta-cognition, and perspective taking that underlie SEL. The program is
designed to develop, a safe, positive classroom climate to begin the school year, and facilitate
social and academic learning.
The study herein was intended to explore emotional and behavioral outcomes of the
RD program. The study involved 218 intermediate (grades 4-7) students and their teachers,
divided into intervention and control groups. Students were assessed pre and post
intervention for the development of self-awareness, self-respect, awareness of others, and
respect for others. Measures of classroom climate were also included. Students completed
several measures of SEL, and a selected sample were interviewed to obtain detailed
information about their experiences in inclusive diverse classrooms, and with the RD
program itself. Data were analyzed using both qualitative and quantitative methods,
including thematic content analysis procedures and repeated measures MANCOVA’s.
Both students and teachers indicated that the RD program significantly increased
students’ self-respect, awareness of others, and respect for others, while students in control
iii
classrooms decreased in these factors. Classroom climate also significantly improved for
treatment classrooms, and, similarly, decreased in control classrooms. Results are discussed
in terms of their educational implications, limitations, and suggestions for further research.
Introduction and Literature Review
Children of the same age enter today’s classrooms with differing learning profiles
(i.e., learning strengths and challenges), background knowledge, and experience (Schirmer &
Casbon, 1995). Students do not learn alone but, rather, in diverse communities, interacting
with their teachers, in the company of their peers, and bringing with them the values and
teachings of their families. In recent years unacceptably high rates of school violence,
bullying, school dropout, youth suicide, and other negative behaviors have been documented
(McCombs, 2004; Zins & Elias, 2006). These behaviors have taken a toll on students’ social
and emotional well-being, evidenced by rising rates of depression, emotion-related illnesses,
and expressions of fear and hopelessness (Hymel, Schonert-Reichl, & Miller, 2006; ModrcinMcCarthy & Dalton, 1996). Students with mental health problems and deficits in socialemotional competence have difficulty learning, and in some cases, may disrupt the
educational experiences of their peers (Cooper, 2008; Greenberg et al., 2003).
According to Weissberg, Kumpfer, and Seligman (2003), while preventing these
problem behaviors is a worthwhile endeavor, “it is undisputable that young people who are
not drug abusers, who are not depressed or suicidal, who are not antisocial or in jail, and who
are not school dropouts may still lack the resources to become healthy adults, caring family
members, responsible neighbors, productive workers, and contributing citizens” (p. 427).
Relatively few children have personal competencies, values, attitudes, and environmental
supports that protect against high-risk behavior and encourage the growth of positive
behaviors. Thus, developing all students’ self-respect and respect for others in a diverse
community of learners has become a paramount challenge for educators (Levine, 2001).
2
To educate means “to develop and cultivate” (Merriam-Webster, 1978). To teach, on
the other hand, is defined as “to cause to know; to show how; to guide; to make to know the
consequences of” (Merriam-Webster). Education, therefore, includes more than instruction in
academic subjects, and teaching includes more than just content delivery. Education must
develop the whole child and cultivate all of the skills, attitudes, and knowledge necessary for
successful integration into society. Thus, practices such as inclusion that aim to educate
students in the full sense of the word must promote their social, emotional, and physical
development, in addition to their academic achievement. As Elias (2001) eloquently put it,
“Schools should prepare students for the tests of life, not a life of tests” (p. 1).
Recent years have witnessed a growing proportion of school-age children
demonstrating social-emotional and behavioral problems that interfere with their
relationships, academic achievement, and their potential to be contributing members of their
community (e.g., Greenberg, Domitrovich, & Bumbarger, 2001; Zins & Elias, 2006).
Findings from a number of recent research investigations indicate that schools are among the
most effective socialization contexts in our culture, and among the most influential in guiding
the social and emotional learning of elementary school children (Schonert-Reichl, Smith, &
Zaidman-Zait, 2006). Schools provide a unique opportunity for encouraging the development
of social competence because many of students’ interpersonal interactions occur in a setting
in which adults can intervene and thus, foster positive growth and development. A growing
number of studies exist suggesting that children’s social and emotional learning can be
fostered via classroom and school-based intervention efforts (Durlak & Weissberg, 2007;
Graczyk et al., 2000; Greenberg et al., 2001). Given the data indicating a rising rate of
3
children at risk, school-based programs that develop all children’s social and emotional
learning must be a priority for educational researchers and practitioners.
In Canada, the Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees linguistic rights of the
founding English and French cultures, Aboriginal rights, the right to an equitable education
for all children, and the preservation and enhancement of our multicultural heritage. The
right to an “equitable” education, and the enhancement of multiculturalism, influence
inclusive school systems. Many schools in Canada take part in anti-racism and multicultural
programming (Gill & Chalmers, 2007). Inclusive education, defined in British Columbia as
“the principle that all students are entitled to equitable access to learning, achievement and
the pursuit of excellence in all aspects of their educational programs,” has been mandated
(http://www.bced.gov.bc.ca/policy/policies/special_ed.htm). Inclusion in this definition
means that students attend their neighborhood schools, and are enrolled in regular education
classrooms. According to the Ministry of Education, the emphasis on educating students with
special needs in neighborhood school classrooms with their age and grade peers, however,
does not preclude the appropriate use of resource rooms for short term pull-out instruction
(e.g. for small-group reading intervention for a half hour a day).
To support inclusion and diversity, several provinces have added social and emotional
curricula to their mandate. For instance, in British Columbia, the province in which the
current study took place, the Ministry of Education defines social responsibility as one of
four “foundational skills,” equal in importance to reading, writing, and numeracy. In Ontario,
the government has begun a $2 million initiative to support character education in schools.
Despite these rights, and efforts, many Canadian youth continue to struggle socially and
emotionally. Approximately 20% of children and adolescents, well over 800,000 children in
4
Canada, experience mental health problems severe enough to warrant mental health services
(Kutcher & Davidson, 2007; Romano et al., 2001).
In a recent study of 7,235 Canadian youth aged 10 to 16, 33% of boys and 30% of
girls reported being the victims of bullying in the previous few months (Schonert-Reichl &
Hymel, 2007). This victimization was associated with increased health problems, not only for
the victims, but also for students who had witnessed bullying, who reported higher levels of
depression than students who had not been so exposed. Substance abuse also continues to be
a significant issue for youth in Canada (Leslie, 2008). Health Canada surveys indicate the
mean age for the first use of alcohol is 11 years. Students in grades 7-9 reported initial use of
cannabis at age 12, and 12.5% of these students reported using substances other than alcohol,
tobacco, or cannabis.
Recent reports indicate Canada spends about $14.4 billion dollars a year on the
treatment of mental illness, and it is estimated that this number will continue to increase until
it becomes the largest health care cost in the country (McEwan, Waddell, & Barker, 2007).
Yet, about 75% of children with mental disorders do not seek or receive treatment. Programs
in schools could reach many of these children. Thus, a combination of academic learning and
social and emotional curricula with an emphasis on prevention and health is called for
(Hymel et al., 2006).
In the current study, the experiences of elementary school-aged children in diverse,
intermediate (grades 4-7), inclusive classrooms were explored, and the effects of a multiple
intelligences based program designed to increase students’ self and social awareness and
respect, key factors in the development of social and emotional health, were evaluated.
“Respecting Diversity” (RD) is a theoretically derived social competence program, based on
5
the framework for social and emotional learning (SEL) proposed by Zins, Bloodworth,
Weissberg, and Walberg (2004), and using a multiple intelligences (MI) framework derived
from the work of Gardner (1993). The study reported herein is the first attempt to examine its
impact empirically.
Social and Emotional Learning
What is Social and Emotional Learning?
The construct of social and emotional learning (SEL) has evolved from the research
investigating emotional intelligence, which is based on the work of Salovey and Mayer, and
popularized by Goleman (1995) (Elias, 2004; Kelly, Longbottom, Potts, & Williamson,
2004). The use of the term emotional intelligence is related to Gardner’s (1983) multiple
intelligences theory where interpersonal intelligence is defined as the capacity to detect and
respond appropriately to the moods, motivations and desires of others and intrapersonal
intelligence as the capacity to be self-aware and in tune with inner feelings, values, beliefs
and thinking processes (Lazear, 1992). Gardner’s interpersonal and intrapersonal
intelligences were combined in the construct of emotional intelligence (Goleman, 2004).
Emotional intelligence was defined as a type of social intelligence that involved the ability to
recognize and monitor one’s own and others’ emotions, and use this information to guide
thoughts and actions (Salovey & Mayer, 1990). The use of the term intelligence to describe
social-emotional abilities is controversial (Kaufman & Kaufman, 2001). Regardless of the
term, whether intelligence, competence, learning, or skills, we must not lose sight of the fact
that there is a vast array of research to support the importance of social and emotional
development in students’ academic and personal success and satisfaction (Kelly et al., 2004;
Thomas & Rohwer, 1986).
6
SEL has been defined in several ways that have common themes. According to Zins
et al. (2004), SEL is the process through which children enhance their ability to integrate
thinking, feeling, and behaving to achieve important life tasks. It has also been defined as the
process through which we learn to recognize and manage emotions, care about others, make
good decisions, behave ethically and responsibly, develop positive relationships, and avoid
negative behaviors (Weissberg, Resnik, Payton, & O’Brien, 2003) or as “ (a) mastery and
appropriate use of interpersonal and small-group skills…(b) internalization of prosocial
attitudes and values needed to achieve goals, solve problems, become emotionally involved
in school and work, and succeed in school and throughout life” (Johnson & Johnson, 2004, p.
40). According to the Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning
(CASEL), SEL is now defined as “the process of acquiring and effectively applying the
knowledge, attitudes, and skills necessary to recognize and manage emotions, developing
caring and concern for others, making responsible decisions, establishing positive
relationships, and handling challenging situations capably” (Zins & Elias, 2006, p. 1).
The Importance of SEL
Research indicates that SEL has positive effects on many aspects of children’s
development, including academic performance, physical, mental, and emotional health,
prosocial behaviors, and citizenship (Zins & Elias, 2006). SEL also affects job/career
success, as employers seek employees who work well with others, and interact positively
with the public (Goleman, 2006). SEL reduces the risk of maladjustment, failed relationships,
interpersonal violence, substance abuse, and unhappiness (Elias et al., 1997). The classical
analytic intelligence, or IQ, has been shown to account for only 20-25% of the variance in
job/academic performance, leaving 75 – 80% of the variance unexplained, and accounted for
7
by a variety of factors, including SEL, since SEL has been show to be related to academic
and career success (Hymel et al., 2006).
Many studies in the field of prevention research have focused on risk factors for
students in high-risk categories. However, it seems logical that prevention research should
also focus on protective factors that prevent students from becoming at risk (Graczyk et al.,
2000). Universal programs that promote protective factors for all youth can reach the
broadest population possible at an early age (Hymel et al., 2006). Schools are being called
upon to address the human need for connectedness with one another and with the teachings
of diverse peoples (Palmer, 1998/1999). According to Palmer, when schools fail to do so,
students become bored and alienated. Alienation in a population of any age is caused by
failing to provide supports for social and emotional issues (Ryan & Deci, 2000). Alienation
can result in an increased rate of loneliness for students, as they are unable to establish
positive peer relationships and a social network (Marcoen & Goossens, 1993). Given that
alienation has been shown to be significantly associated with school dropout, gang activity,
and poor peer, school-student, and teacher-student relationships (Brown, Higgins, Pierce,
Hong, & Thoma, 2003), reducing alienation has become a key goal for schools. Creating a
classroom environment where students feel safe, secure, and have a sense of belonging will
help reduce alienation, fear and anxiety (Curran, 2003; Dwyer, 2002). Classroom climates in
which there is a high degree of cooperation result in greater academic achievement (Ghaith,
2003). Youths who are attached and committed to school, are highly involved in school, and
have positive beliefs or aspirations towards school and school achievement are much less
likely to become seriously involved in delinquency and drug use (Sprott, 2004). It seems
logical, then, that the development of SEL skills is more likely to occur in environments in
8
which mutual respect, cooperation, caring, and decision making are the norm. In other words,
classroom climate counts.
In addition to fostering a sense of community, it is important for all teachers to
promote the affirmation of diversity in their classrooms. Teachers are now faced with larger
and more diverse classrooms that include students with social, emotional, and behavioral
challenges (Hymel et al., 2006). Alienation has been shown to increase for students with
diverse cultural and learning profiles (Brown et al., 2003). Combating bullying and
alienation, therefore, requires instilling in children a respect for all peoples, regardless of
culture, ability, or appearance. When teachers and peers learn to see the diverse backgrounds
of their students/classmates as resources, these students’ experiences and learning profiles
become positive contributions to the social, emotional, and academic life of the classroom,
and students develop respect for self and other (Brown et al., 2003). By recognizing that
people have different talents, we accept that everyone has something to contribute to the
community (Dwyer, 2002). Thus, teachers who meet children's diverse needs are more likely
to have children in their classroom who perceive school favorably (Brock et al., 2008).
Attention to social and emotional issues has thus become a necessity for teachers and
schools, as they try to meet the challenge of teaching children in a changing and complex
world where inclusion is valued (Hymel et al., 2006).
There is little argument that, ideally, all children would learn to be compassionate,
kind, and responsible citizens of their communities, and that schools have some role to play
in this process. However, debate has raged over to what extent schools can or should be
asked to devote time to social and emotional learning given their emphasis on academic
learning (Elias, Zins, Graczyk, & Weissberg, 2003). What is not recognized in this argument
9
is the link between social and emotional development and academic success. Strengthening
students’ sense of community in school increases academic motivation and aspirations, and
has a substantial effect on academic achievement (Brock et al., 2008; Zins et al., 2004).
Wang et al. (1997) examined 28 categories of influence on learning. They found that eight of
the 11 most influential categories involved social and emotional factors, including studentteacher social interactions, classroom climate, and peer factors. SEL improves school
attitudes, behavior, and performance, including performance on standardized tests (Malecki
& Elliott, 2002; Porath, 2003; Zins & Elias, 2006). In a meta-analysis of 270 research
studies, Weissberg et al. (as cited in Hymel et al., 2006) found that students participating in
SEL programs ranked at least 15 percentile points higher on achievement tests than students
who did not participate. In fact, Welsh, Parke, and Widaman (2001) found a significant
direct-path coefficient from social to academic competence (.47) during the middle
elementary school years. Not only do students in SEL programs improve academically,
students who then leave schools with SEL programs for schools that do not have them
decrease in academic achievement (Fonagy et al., 2005). Amazingly, Caprara et al. (2000)
found that students’ academic achievement in grade 8 could be better predicted from
knowing their grade 3 prosocial behavior scores than from knowing their grade 3 academic
achievement. Clearly, then, social and emotional skills are a significant influence on
academic development.
This relationship between SEL and academic learning can be explained, at least in
part, by brain function. Meaningful learning involves multiple aspects of the brain.
According to Gardner (1993), anatomically distinct areas of the brain are responsible for
processing different kinds of information (e.g. visual images, language, sensory information,
10
etc.), thus resulting in the concept of “multiple” intelligences. Brain research has shown that
learning requires both cognitive and affective processes, as emotions control a variety of
academic precursors such as attention and memory (Levine, 2001; McCombs, 2004). This
means that students must feel safe, comfortable, and positive about themselves and their
community for them to be able to stay focussed, learn, and remember (Dwyer, 2002).
SEL interventions have been shown to have the capacity to change brain function,
and indeed, brain structure, producing adaptive responses in social and intellectual
functioning (Davidson, 2008; Goleman, 2006). Multiple areas of the frontal and prefrontal
lobes of the brain are involved in processing social and emotional information and decision
making. These same areas are also involved in critical and analytical thinking; therefore,
development or overwhelming of this area affects academic learning as well as social and
emotional learning (Dwyer, 2002). Training in skills related to SEL has been shown to
regulate brain response, such that students with SEL training can recover more quickly
neurologically (i.e., literally reduce the response in the amygdala; lower levels of the stress
hormone cortisol) from a negative stimulus (e.g., an incident of bullying or fearful
experience), allowing them to regulate their thinking, problem solve, and respond more
appropriately (Davidson, 2008). Thus, focusing only on academic instruction in an effort to
help students improve academic, personal/social, and job performance is unlikely to lead to
success (Adelman & Taylor, 2000; Noddings, 1995). Addressing students’ social and
emotional development is therefore not an “add on” to the curriculum, but rather is an
integral and necessary process for helping all students succeed.
11
Key Factors in SEL
In classrooms inclusive of children with diverse cultural backgrounds, languages, and
abilities, social and emotional skills become increasingly important if a supportive and caring
learning environment is to be established. Children are required to negotiate social situations
with others who interpret these situations in light of their diverse background experiences,
values, and beliefs. Diversity in much of the research has focused on racial and cultural
diversity (Pickett, 2008). However, diversity in learning strengths and challenges also creates
challenges for students working and living cooperatively in learning communities (Greenberg
et al., 2001). Ideally, preventative interventions help all students develop resiliency and selfworth, while at the same time facilitating positive social interactions and classroom climates.
It is important that educators recognize that diversity, or diverse learners, does NOT refer to
children with exceptional needs, or to children who are members of minority races alone. All
children are diverse – body type, socio-economic status, personalities, ethnicities, languages,
family constructions, and learning styles all contribute to the makeup of a diverse classroom.
What we know from brain research is that even a group of so-called “typical” learners from
Caucasian, middle class families would be diverse in how they learn best, their interests,
background knowledge, and their social and emotional development (Gardner, 1983). Thus,
teaching to diversity requires that teachers create a learning climate and activities that allow
all children to feel safe, respected, and valued for what they have to contribute. The most
effective schools seem to be those that are most able to build upon and integrate all of their
diverse elements with greatest “synergy” (Elias, Zins, Graczyk, & Weissberg, 2003, p. 306).
According to Greenberg et al. (2001), SEL programs can develop protective factors in
children that reduce the likelihood of psychological or mental health problems in adolescence
12
and later life. In the elementary school years, research has clearly demonstrated that key
amongst these protective factors is self and social awareness, and respect (Greenberg et al.,
2001; Zins et al., 2004).
According to the framework proposed by Zins et al. (2004), and accepted by CASEL
and many others in the field of SEL, there are five social and emotional competencies
underlying SEL:
1. Self-Awareness
2. Self-Management
3. Social Awareness
4. Relationship Skills
5. Responsible Decision Making
In this framework, self-awareness incorporates elements of self-respect delineated in the
literature, such as taking pride in one’s accomplishments and developing self-efficacy.
However, self-respect can be distinguished from self-awareness in children because selfawareness does not necessarily include an acceptance of, and pride in, one’s strengths and
challenges. One can recognize that they have strength in athletics, for instance, and
challenges with reading. This recognition implies self-awareness. However, depending on the
value the child places on athletics and literacy skills, this recognition/awareness may or may
not result in self-respect. Thus, in the current study, self-awareness and self-respect were
separated into distinct concepts to be developed/assessed. To keep language consistent,
relationship management and responsible decision-making were then referred to as respect
for others, as this underlies engagement in positive interactions with diverse peers. Thus, a
four factor model of SEL was developed for the study.
13
Self- and social awareness. Self-awareness involves recognizing and acknowledging
one’s strengths and challenges (Brandt, 1998; Hippe, 2004; Jaouen, 1990). Children who are
self-aware are reflective: they know their strengths and challenges, and set realistic goals
based on them. They are able to recognize their own emotions, and are aware of how they are
perceived by others. Social awareness, on the other hand, involves the ability to perspective
take (Zins et al., 2004). Children with well-developed social awareness recognize that others
have differing strengths and challenges, are therefore able to understand others’ reactions to
situations, and suggest win-win solutions to problems.
Self- and social respect. Children who show self-respect are neither harshly critical
nor falsely confident in speaking of themselves. They accept their strengths and challenges,
take pride in their accomplishments, and believe in their ability to achieve their goals. Selfrespect, then, involves “accepting one’s current reality as well as striving towards one’s
future potential” (Hippe, 2004, p. 240). Children who have self-respect embrace their
strengths and see them as tools for achieving their goals and overcoming their challenges
(Hippe). They are willing to take risks and try challenging tasks. These students become
emotionally involved in school, and feel a sense of belonging within its walls.
Respect for others parallels self-respect, in that it not only implies a realistic
understanding of others’ strengths, challenges, and perspectives, but also an
acceptance/valuing of them. Students who are respectful of others demonstrate empathy for
others, and accept the relative strengths and challenges of others in relation to their own.
They can work cooperatively with others, utilizing their own and others’ abilities
appropriately (Johnson & Johnson, 2004). Socially, respect for others implies an appreciation
for diversity (Zins et al., 2004). Students who respect others value the contributions of their
14
classmates, seek partnerships and friendships with others of diverse abilities and
backgrounds, and show appreciation when supported by others. They take pride in others’
achievements, and develop prosocial goals. Students with well developed respect for others
will stand up for others when they witness injustice, and avoid behaviors that negatively
impact people in their environment.
Previous research has found that school and classroom climates have important
effects on children's perceptions and behaviors (Brock et al., 2008; Sprott, 2004). Classrooms
provide different emotional, social, and academic environments, and these factors affect
student’s social and emotional learning, which in turn, affects the classroom climate (Keogh,
1998). An emotionally supportive classroom when children are 10 to 13 years old has been
shown to be related to lower levels of violence two years later, when the children were 12 to
15 years old (Sprott, 2004). In order to assess the outcomes of any program, intervention or
curriculum designed to promote SEL, therefore, it is important to acquire baseline measures
of classroom climate, and compare them to post intervention measures.
Operational Definition of SEL
In a diverse classroom community of learners in which the goal is to learn in ways that
develop both academic and social success for all, social and emotional learning can therefore
be defined as the process of developing self and social awareness and respect within a
compassionate learning community.
Important Components of SEL Programs
Research has begun to document important attributes of effective social and
emotional learning programs (Goleman, 2004). Effective programs for developing social and
emotional learning have been found to have several key components, including teaching
15
specific skills such as self-awareness, self-respect, empathy (respect for others), perspective
taking (awareness of others), and cooperation (Zins et al., 2004). As well, effective programs
that address non-academic student needs must be integrated into comprehensive school
programs if they are to be successful over the long term (McCombs, 2004). The use of
traditional short-term, primarily didactic, isolated (uncoordinated) efforts to promote SEL is
not as effective as long-term coordinated efforts. Despite these research findings, the vast
majority of SEL programs continue to be designed and taught as separate curricula, for a
short, specified period of time with little or no linkage to other subjects or daily life in the
classroom (Cooper, 2008; Zins et al., 2004). As well, many current programs tend to focus on
emotional regulation and problem solving rather than on developing self and social respect.
Review of Existing SEL Programs
RD’s emphasis is on the promotion of positive development among all children and
youth. Protective factors such as bonding to school, learning to take the perspectives of
others, and developing emotional resilience as the result of self-respect keep children from
harm’s way or buffer the effects of negative experiences (Zins & Elias, 2006). According to
Zins and Elias, SEL programming is “intended to enhance the growth of all children, to help
them develop healthy behaviors, and to prevent engaging in maladaptive and unhealthy
behaviors” (p. 2). As such, SEL programs have been developed with two distinct purposes: to
promote protective factors and develop competencies for all children/youth, or to prevent
maladaptive behaviors in targeted samples of children/youth deemed “at risk.” The RD
program addresses the first purpose; many of the comprehensive programs in existence focus
on the second purpose. For instance, recently a group of prevention researchers developed an
SEL program called “Fast Track.” This program is a school wide program that is intended to
16
prevent conduct disorder and associated adolescent problem behaviors (Greenberg et al.,
2001). The program targets those at risk for externalizing behaviors, and works with both the
children and their families.
In the Lower Mainland of British Columbia, a commonly implemented SEL program
is “Second Step.” The Second Step model focuses specifically on skills to understand and
prevent violence (Grossman & Neckerman, 1997). In the Grossman and Neckerman study,
Second Step was shown to reduce aggression as measured by coded observations, though not
according to parent and teacher ratings. Second Step, while perhaps useful for this one
specific aspect of SEL, does not meet the criteria set out by Zins et al. (2004) for effective
SEL programs, as it is short term and not integrated into the regular curriculum of the
classroom, nor does it extend beyond violence prevention to the larger scope of SEL.
Another program being implemented across Canada and in New Zealand is “The
Roots of Empathy” (ROE). ROE has as its cornerstone monthly visits by an infant and
his/her parent(s) that serve as a springboard for lessons that teach infant development,
emotion knowledge, and perspective taking (Gordon, 2007). This program focuses on
developing empathy and emotional understanding, and reducing aggression. ROE thus has a
wider focus than many programs.
One of the first comprehensive SEL programs was cooperative learning. Students not
only experienced the excitement of learning academic material from one another, they also
developed important skills in negotiation and conflict resolution, and a peer culture for
supporting academic achievement (Johnson & Johnson, 2004). The Child Development
Project (CDP) took this one step further, integrating cooperative learning opportunities, a
developmental approach to discipline, and a democratic approach to classroom management
17
(Battistich, Schaps, & Wilson, 2004). The Child Development Project closely resembles the
RD program in some specific ways; it involves students working together and building
classroom climate, and it emphasizes the promotion of positive development, rather than
prevention of negative paths. However, CDP does not focus on diversity issues explicitly, a
critical element in inclusive classrooms. In fact, CDP was found not to impact concern for
others (Battistich et al., 2004).
One of the more promising universal prevention programs is Promoting Alternative
Thinking Strategies (PATHS). PATHS focuses on developing social and emotional
competence through cognitive skill building (Greenberg et al., 2001). It has shown
significant promise longitudinally in promoting children’s social problem solving and
emotional understanding. However, PATHS does not explicitly seek to develop respect for
others in diverse learning communities; much of the research conducted on PATHS
curriculum has been conducted in non-inclusive classrooms, or special education classes (see
for instance, Kam, Greenberg, & Kusche, 2004) .
As a program designed by teachers for teachers, the RD program therefore differs in
some significant ways from other SEL programs. The program was initially designed by the
author, and then reviewed and modified by many teachers of grades K-12 over a 6-year
period. Most SEL programs are highly scripted in their implementation, requiring teachers to
teach them as a separate curriculum. The RD curriculum provides teachers with a nine-lesson
script which is flexible in its implementation. Teachers can break lessons into parts, integrate
them with other curricula, and extend them as they wish. The curriculum is meant to be
differentiated to fit the unique context of each classroom, while still maintaining particular
concepts/skills, as most curricula are. For instance, most science curricula are meant to
18
promote scientific learning/thinking, and include particular concepts and skills, but do not
prescribe to teachers exactly how they be taught, in what time frame, etc. Thus the curricula
recognize teachers’ expertise and can flex to fit the context of individual classrooms. The RD
curriculum is meant to promote social and emotional learning/thinking; includes particular
concepts and skills; but similarly does not prescribe an exact delivery model.
Another unique feature of the RD program is that it uses a multiple intelligences
framework to facilitate SEL. MI theory is widely known as an educational framework for the
delivery of content area curricula. A search of the Chapters bookstore website turned up 111
resource books for teachers and parents on the subject (http://www.chapters.indigo.ca/).
Many resources exist that support teaching through the intelligences, and whether they use
MI specific language or not, most curricula and university teacher training courses instruct
teachers in the use of multi-modal teaching (e.g. teaching through the use of visual tasks,
hands-on kinesthetic learning, etc.). Thus the RD program fits within teachers’ skill set, and
is easily extended across the curriculum. According to Taylor and Dymnicki (2007),
researchers have offered little information about how to infuse SEL interventions into the
regular academic curriculum and create opportunities for students to learn through authentic
experiences. By using MI as a framework, the RD program aims to do just this.
The potential benefits of promoting positive development among all youth, not just
those with identified risk factors, have been recognized by others in the prevention field (e.g.,
Albee, 1996; Battistich et al., 2000; Cowen, 1994). However, the health promotion model has
received far less consideration in the field than the risk-reduction, prevention of disorder
model.
19
Purpose of the RD Program
The purpose of the RD program is to provide a framework for SEL that integrates
social and emotional learning with academic instruction for diverse learners, thereby
facilitating the development of self-respect and respect for others. This framework is of
critical importance if we are to create compassionate learning communities, and positively
influence many of the problem behaviors in our schools and communities.
Goals of the “Respecting Diversity” (RD) Program
Given the framework for effective programs delineated by Zins et al. (2004), it is
clear that SEL programs need to develop self and social awareness and respect, and do so in
an integrated fashion that creates a compassionate learning community. Greenberg (2004)
pointed out that if research in SEL is to move forward, researchers will be required to
collaborate with schools and teachers rather than researchers approaching schools to get their
permission to test programs not currently in use. Evidence based practices have not been as
widely used as they could be, and researchers have had difficulty influencing teachers,
educational leaders, and schools to adopt SEL practices (Zins & Elias, 2006). The RD
curriculum was developed by teachers in elementary inclusive school classrooms (including
the author of this study), with the intention of developing social responsibility, the term used
in British Columbia for social and emotional learning and competence. The program was
integrated across the curriculum, and directly reflected prescribed learning outcomes of the
Ministry of Education related to Career and Personal Planning, Anti-Bullying, Inclusive
Education, and Social Responsibility (see Appendix G). Goals of the program include
developing specific components of self and social awareness and respect, such as selfefficacy, goal setting, demystification of individual and class learning profiles, emotional
20
resiliency, perspective taking, empathy, and valuing diversity, as well as the creation of a
positive, inclusive classroom climate.
Self-efficacy, or the belief that one can be successful, is an important part of selfrespect, and a factor in student achievement (Thomas & Rohwer, 1986). Perceived selfefficacy can also affect self-management and coping efforts, as a student is more likely to
persevere in a task that is challenging if they believe they will ultimately be successful, and
thus develop greater emotional resiliency (Carns & Carns, 1991). In turn, students are then
more capable of setting goals and being self-motivated and disciplined. High self-efficacy
may also protect students from internalizing the effects of any teasing or taunting related to
bullying, or becoming bullies themselves (King, Vidourek, Davis & McClellan, 2002; Weir,
2001). Students' perceived control and competence are also significant predictors of selfesteem and academic performance (Deci & Ryan, 2000; Grolnick, Ryan, & Deci, 1991;
Wiest, Wong, & Kreil, 1998). Thus programs that encourage teachers to project hope –
convincing students of their worth, power, and ability to achieve - are vitally important in
diverse learning communities (McCombs, 2004). A learning model that is based on
developing caring relationships and respect for the unique way each child perceives the
world and learns is therefore advocated.
Developing self-awareness and respect necessitates helping students understand their
unique learning profile. This in turn allows students to become aware of how they learn best,
and see their strengths and what they can contribute (Brandt, 1998; Jaouen, 1990). Thus
students need to know how their mind works, recognize their strengths and challenges, know
how to use their strengths to make choices for academic activities (e.g. choosing a project or
elective course that suits their abilities) and see how their learning profile can make valuable
21
contributions to their community and future career choices (Levine, 2001, 2002; Prescott,
2001).
Social awareness and respect allow students to appreciate diversity, develop respect
and empathy for others, and gain an understanding of diverse learning profiles and the
advantages to this diversity within a community (Peavey & Leff, 2002; Smith, 1999).
Valuing diversity increases students’ tolerance for each other’s differences, and allows
students to manage their relationships within diverse learning communities in prosocial ways
(Brandt, 1998; Jaouen, 1990). Students working together in classrooms make up social
systems. The work atmosphere and the social relations in these classes constitute the
classroom climate. Students, teachers and school management influence this climate (Sprott,
2004). In a class characterized by a nurturing climate, teachers emphasize co-operation and
pupils work well together. A positive relationship between the climate and the children’s
adjustment, including self-esteem, interest and motivation, behavior and school achievement,
has been found in a considerable number of studies (Somersalo, Solantaus, & Almqvist,
2002).
In terms of peers, it has been suggested by several authors that feelings of acceptance
and being valued can be achieved through the development of peer support systems that
encourage a sense of community (Humphrey, 2003; Somersalo, Solantaus, & Almqvist,
2002). Thus the social context of a classroom is extremely important in shaping the child’s
sense of self (Humphrey, 2004). The RD curriculum seeks, therefore, to develop self and
social awareness and respect through activities that allow students to learn about their own
and their classmates’ learning profiles, and work cooperatively to achieve their goals.
22
Multiple Intelligences (MI)
Traditional curricula and instructional techniques focus on a narrow range of
information processing and teaching techniques, primarily written and text based, and
therefore create an educational disadvantage by which some students are favoured over
others (Gardner, 1995; Hearne & Stone, 1995). This leaves students with differing learning
profiles (e.g., those who do not learn best through text) to struggle to learn in ways that do
not best fit with their learning strengths. Thus, for instance, a student with strength in visual
and spatial processing, who might one day be a great architect, can be made to feel incapable
because he/she is not as good a writer as others, and art is seen as being of secondary
importance. These same students are then perceived by peers to be less able, which can lead
to bullying or taunting (Mishna, 2003; Norwich & Kelly, 2004). For these students, negative
outcomes in emotional, social, and academic development are commonly the result
(McDougall, DeWit, King, Miller & Killip, 2004; Newcomer & Barenbaum, 1995). Thus,
the presence of students with diverse learning profiles in inclusive classrooms necessitates a
curricular framework that supports both social and emotional learning and multiple methods
of engaging students in academic activities.
The theory of multiple intelligences (MI) (Gardner, 1983) is a regular education
reform movement that appears to include many of the teaching philosophies, techniques, and
assessment methods found to be effective for developing social and emotional learning and
positive classroom climates. Students learn well through their strengths, and are more
motivated academically when given opportunities to work in strength areas (Dwyer, 2002;
Elias, 2004). This can be accomplished by helping students work through their multiple
intelligences (Armstrong, 1994). As Elias eloquently states, “Working through multiple
23
intelligences is more than just pedagogy. It represents finding windows into the souls of
children and ways to reach them in powerful and meaningful ways” (p. 58). Based on
Howard Gardner’s research with typical children and adults and those with brain injuries at
Harvard’s Project Zero (Gardner, 1983), MI challenges current theories surrounding
intelligence, learning, teaching, curriculum, and assessment (Blythe & Gardner, 1990).
Gardner postulated seven different intelligences, and later added an eighth (Checkley, 1997),
as an alternative to the current single intelligence construct reflected in traditional IQ
measures. Gardner (1995) believed that traditional curricula and instructional techniques
utilize only two of the eight intelligences, verbal-linguistic and logico-mathematical. Thus,
practices based on MI have often been cited as appropriate and facilitative of inclusion, since
they are designed to accommodate a diverse range of learners (Armstrong, 1994; Eichinger &
Downing, 1996; Falvey, Givner, & Kimm, 1996).
MI and SEL
Gardner’s eight intelligences include two social and emotional constructs.
Interpersonal intelligence
Allows us to develop a genuine sense of caring and empathy for each other.
Through interpersonal intelligence we ‘stand in another person’s shoes’, so to
speak. It is a person-to-person way of knowing through which we maintain
our individuality but also become more than ourselves as we identify with and
become a part of others. (Lazear, 1992, p. 17).
Intrapersonal intelligence, on the other hand,
Involves an awareness of the internal aspects of self – feelings, thinking
processes, intuition, or spirituality. Both self-identity and the ability to
24
transcend self are a part of intrapersonal intelligence. When we experience a
sense of unity…feel the lure of the future, or dream of heretofore unrealized
potentials in our lives, it is the result of our intrapersonal way of knowing.
(Lazear, 1992, p. 18).
Interpersonal intelligence appears to include the SEL components of social awareness
and respect. Intrapersonal intelligence incorporates self-awareness and respect. The
recognition of these intelligences, and development of them in students, would therefore
provide a vehicle for SEL programs, as well as engaging students in academic activities that
are more likely to be motivating and self-managed, and build self-efficacy. However, before
these intelligences can be developed, they must be introduced to students and teachers, in a
way that facilitates students’ self-understanding, and appreciation for others.
Demystification
A process that allows students to explore their own learning profiles, the diversity of
profiles that make up their community, and the advantages to this diversity would be a
powerful tool in the development of children’s social and emotional well-being.
Demystification is a process that provides children with more accurate personal insight
(Levine, 2001). Helping students understand their strengths and challenges, and the
advantages of having diverse learners in a classroom community, helps students to develop
emotional resiliency and acceptance of others (Adelman & Taylor, 1984; Shepard, 2004).
Demystification can take place one to one, in small groups, or in a classroom setting. The
goals of demystification are to develop student’s self and social awareness and respect. In
this study, the process of facilitating understanding of self and others is therefore referred to
as demystification.
25
Purpose of the Study
Prevention Research aims to promote the well being of children and youth and to
reduce the prevalence of high-risk behaviors and poor outcomes in children, families and
communities (The College of Health and Human Development Prevention Research Centre,
2008). The current research was designed in the Prevention Research paradigm, and had two
distinct purposes: 1. to investigate children’s experiences of respect for diversity in inclusive
classrooms, and 2. to investigate the extent to which the RD curriculum, which involves the
demystification of learning profiles using a series of multiple intelligences-based learning
investigations, facilitates the development of students’ self and social awareness and respect.
Intermediate classrooms (grades 4-7) were introduced to an RD curriculum that allows
students to become metacognitively aware (i.e., be demystified) of their learning strengths
and challenges, and explore the advantages and disadvantages of a diversity of learning
profiles within classroom communities. The present study contributes to and extends the
literature on evaluations of school-based primary preventive interventions in several ways.
First, this research was designed to investigate the efficacy of an SEL curriculum that
develops self and social awareness and respect, rather than emotional regulation or problem
solving. Controlling anger, and developing conflict resolution skills teaches children how to
react when a problem has occurred, but they do not create a climate where respect for others
and a sense of security decreases conflicts overall. Second, the RD program is long term in
its implementation, and is cross-curricular. Third, this research focuses on the evaluation of a
curriculum exploring children’s experience of respect for self and others in diverse, inclusive
classrooms. Fourth, this research investigates the use of a Multiple Intelligences (MI)
framework for developing social and emotional learning. While there is much talk of the
26
intuitive utility of MI for differentiating instruction, the author was unable to find any
research investigating the outcomes of MI curriculum and instruction for social and
emotional learning. Finally, this investigation focuses on the evaluation of a social emotional
competence promotion program that is a “routine practice program” – that is, a program that
is already being implemented in elementary schools by school staff. Wilson et al. (2003)
pointed out the need to differentiate between evaluations of demonstration programs and
routine practice programs. They defined demonstration programs as those in which
researchers set up a program evaluation under very controlled conditions. Demonstration
programs tend to be implemented by the researchers and/or teachers who are closely
supervised by the researchers. By contrast, routine practice programs are programs that have
been in practice in schools for some years. Evaluations of demonstration programs often have
high internal validity; however they have questionable external validity because they tell us
little about the program’s effectiveness under normal daily implementation by classroom
teachers in the field. The RD curriculum, as stated earlier, is flexible in its implementation,
and in practice by teachers – thus increasing its external validity. Internal validity for such
programs can be increased and supported by cooperative work between researchers and
teachers, thereby insuring fidelity to the goals of the program, while providing flexibility in
its delivery.
The demands on schools to be accountable for educational achievement, behavioral
management, health education, and social, emotional, and character education have grown
immensely. Unfortunately, researchers are often unaware of the competing demands on
teachers and schools, and each discipline proposes additional programming without an
adequate understanding of the precarious balance of time, resources, priorities, and skills
27
school staffs must manage (Sarason, 1996). Schools have thus been overwhelmed by wellintentioned, but fragmented, isolated prevention and promotion programs for such issues as
substance abuse, racism, multiculturalism, emotional regulation, violence prevention, teen
pregnancy, and conflict resolution, among others. These programs are often unrealistic in
their expectations, if not actually disruptive to the central mission of schools (Greenberg et
al., 2003). Thus, a program developed by teachers, that fits within the curriculum,
professional skills, and vision of the schools, may be more likely to be implemented and thus
sustainable (Greenberg, 2004).
Research Questions
1. How aware of their own and others’ learning and social/emotional experiences are
intermediate students in inclusive, diverse classrooms?
2. How is respect for self and others experienced/demonstrated by students in
intermediate inclusive, diverse classrooms?
3. Is the social and emotional development of students in diverse intermediate
classrooms facilitated by Multiple Intelligences curriculum and teaching, as measured
by students’ self and social awareness and respect?
Specifically:
i. Is there a significant difference in students’ self-awareness and respect following
an introduction to multiple intelligences theory and individual and group
demystification regarding the value of diverse learning profiles?
ii. Is there a significant difference in students’ social awareness and respect
following an introduction to multiple intelligences theory and individual and
group demystification regarding the value of diverse learning profiles?
28
CHAPTER 2
Method
It is critically important to create a classroom climate and set of opportunities that
allow social-emotional learning (SEL) skills to flourish in ways that also reflect individuals’
strengths (Elias, 2004). In so doing, students are able to develop self-respect as they become
aware of their own strengths, and how to use them to achieve academic and social success.
As they learn alongside others, they are also given the opportunity to recognize and see value
in the strengths of others.
Background
Until recently, children have rarely been asked about their experiences in the
education system (Hennessey, 1999). However, as diversity increases, and the complexity of
the educational environment grows, it is less and less likely that adults alone, without the
invested participation of the students themselves, can know all there is to know about, and
solve, all of the problems our students face. Student perspectives can improve educational
programming by making curriculum more accessible, creating collaborative processes,
empowering students, and motivating them to participate in their education (Cook-Sather,
2002). School aged children have been shown to make competent decisions regarding
personal health and education (Weithorn & Campbell, 1982). This research, therefore, was
designed to be a dual investigation, first, of teachers’ and children’s experiences of respect
for diversity in inclusive classrooms, and second, of the extent to which an SEL program,
Respecting Diversity (RD), involving the demystification of learning profiles using a series
of multiple intelligences-based learning investigations, facilitates the development of
students’ self and social awareness and respect. Multiple intelligences pedagogy could
29
provide a framework for connecting social and emotional learning with academic pursuits.
However, this has not previously been proposed. The current research is therefore connecting
two bodies of literature in unique ways.
Program Evaluation
In the field of prevention science, programs often undergo a four phase sequence of
evaluations to determine their efficacy in achieving their aims (College of Health and Human
Development Prevention Research Centre, 2008). In the Etiology phase, an examination of
etiological work that may lead to the creation and implementation of an intervention is
undertaken. In the Formative Evaluation phase an evaluation is designed to produce
qualitative and quantitative data and insight during the early developmental phase of an
intervention, including an assessment of (1) the feasibility of program implementation; (2)
the appropriateness of content, methods, materials, media, and instruments; and (3) the
immediate (e.g., 1 hour to 1 week) or short-term (e.g., 1 week to 6 months) cognitive,
psychosocial, psychomotor (skill), and/or behavioral impact of an intervention for a welldefined population at risk. In the Efficacy Evaluation phase an evaluation of the extent to
which a new (untested) intervention produced significant changes in a behavioral impact or a
health outcome rate is explored: Did the intervention produce significant changes among a
sample population at risk under optimal program-practice conditions? In the final phase, An
Effectiveness Evaluation of the extent to which an existing (tested) intervention with
documented internal validity produced a significant change in a behavioral impact or health
outcome rate is undertaken: Did the intervention produce a significant change among a large,
representative sample of a well-defined population at risk under normal program-practice
conditions?
30
The RD program was created and implemented as a grassroots response to the
growing diversity in inclusive, elementary school classrooms. The etiology phase, therefore,
occurred prior to the undertaking of this research. Teachers honed this program initially in
primary classrooms, before it began to be taught to practicing teachers from K-7, and later at
the university level to student teachers preparing to teach grades K-12. Thus feasibility of
implementation and the appropriateness of content, methods, and materials were also
confirmed in clinical practice before formal research was ever undertaken.
In a pilot study (Katz & Porath, 2005) designed to provide further, more detailed
formative evaluation, the RD program was implemented by the first author with fourteen
students in grades 4-7 who were both gifted and learning disabled. Following the program,
students and parents were interviewed to explore their perceptions of the outcomes of this
experience for themselves and/or their child. Parent and student responses were then coded
using a content analysis procedure reflecting outcomes related to self-awareness, self-respect,
social awareness, respect for others, and/or other themes.
Results indicated that students believed that the program had increased selfawareness, and awareness and respect for others. Parents, by contrast, felt strongly that the
program’s greatest impact was on their child’s self-respect, and on other themes such as
parent-child relations, and improved attitudes toward school. The pilot study was used to
hone interview questions and frameworks for coding responses and outcomes in the current
study. However, the outcomes are limited in terms of their generalizability, due to the small
sample size, lack of a control group, and uniqueness of the profiles of students who are both
gifted and learning disabled.
31
The current phase of assessment reflects, therefore, a final phase of the formative
evaluation of this curriculum. That is, this study focused on the immediate (e.g., 1 hour to 1
week) or short-term (e.g., 1 week to 6 months) cognitive, psychosocial, emotional, and/or
behavioral impact of an intervention for a well-defined population. The study thus expanded
and developed the pilot study in several ways. First, the sample (218 students) was much
larger, and was comprised of diverse students (i.e., students of all ability levels and learning
styles, including students with exceptional needs) from regular education classrooms.
Second, a control group was used, and classrooms were randomly assigned to treatment or
control group situations. Third, because a “central question (of current research) is how
effective are prevention programs under ‘real world conditions’” (Greenberg, 2004, p. 8),
regular classroom teachers were trained in program implementation, and implemented the
program in their own classrooms. Fourth, a blind coder was used to review qualitative
interviews to first surface students’ and teachers’ experiences of the program, before
thematic analysis took place by the author. This allows outcomes related and not related to
self and social awareness and respect to be surfaced directly from the data, and reliability
measures to be taken. Finally, quantitative measures were included in addition to the
qualitative measures to triangulate the data.
The methodology for this study parallels common practice in the field of SEL
program evaluation (e.g. Greenberg, Kusche, Cook, & Quamma, 1995). This involves pre
intervention/program delivery and post intervention measurement processes using both
qualitative and quantitative measures. A quasi-experimental control group pretest-posttest
design was used. To address the research questions, there is no choice but to adopt a quasiexperimental design. One of the realities of program adoptions in school districts is that these
32
decisions are driven by district policy and not by evaluators interested in determining the
effect of a particular program or intervention. As a result, evaluators, by and large, cannot
control how students and teachers are assigned. This reality makes experimental design
nearly impossible and forces evaluators to use quasi-experimental design at best (Slayton &
Llosa, 2005). Statistical methods for control of these nesting effects were used, and will be
discussed in a later section.
A number of experts in the field of prevention science have suggested that program
evaluations be directed by recent theory and research in children’s social and emotional
development (Schonert-Reichl et al., 2006). In this methodology, the underlying theoretical
framework of the program was used to determine the measures/variables to be studied (e.g.
self and social awareness and respect), and explore the transformative nature of the program.
Reviews of evaluations of prevention programs in the area of social competence promotion
suggest the importance of examining multiple dimensions of competencies and behaviors
(Graczyk et al., 2000; Schonert-Reichl et al., 2006). Thus, self and social awareness and
respect (4 factors of SEL), and class climate were investigated, in addition to other variables
students perceive as important outcomes of diverse classrooms, and the RD program, as
surfaced by thematic coding analysis.
Design
Debate has raged over the benefits of qualitative and quantitative research in the field
of program evaluation for many years (Slayton & Llosa, 2005). However, recent research has
indicated that a combination of the two methods may be most powerful (Ercikan & Roth,
2006; Smith, 1994), and many authors now argue that, in addition to the use of quantitative
methods, scientifically based research designs should employ qualitative methods when the
33
goal of the research is to evaluate program effectiveness (Patton, 1987). Elias and others have
identified the need for a new model of researcher they term “a participant conceptualizer and
praxis explicator” (as cited in Greenberg, 2004, p.10). To conduct program evaluation
research, Greenberg argued that multiple methodologies are needed, including naturalistic
and descriptive studies in addition to experimental trials.
Quantitative research can clearly indicate whether there are changes from pre to post
intervention. Qualitative methods have the power to explain why and how program outcomes
were or were not attained, as they allow researchers to eliminate potential explanations for
differences between the treatment and comparison groups (Rossi, 1994). A second benefit of
using rich narrative data can be that they add significantly to the usefulness of the findings
for policy-making purposes (Slayton & Llosa, 2005). Finally, it seems misdirected to talk
about program outcomes related to students’ feeling about themselves without directly
speaking to them; children’s insights can help us to understand the effects and evaluate the
effectiveness of SEL programs (Hennessy, 1999). As Cook-Sather (2002) poignantly states,
“There is something fundamentally amiss about building and rebuilding an entire system
without consulting at any point those it is ostensibly designed to serve” (p. 3). In the study
herein, therefore, several dimensions of social and emotional learning were examined both
quantitatively and qualitatively, including class climate, self-awareness, self-respect, social
awareness, and respect for others. Other themes that emerged from content analysis of the
interviews are also discussed.
34
Participants and Settings
School District
Participants were drawn from a large suburban public school district in British
Columbia, Canada, in which the author teaches part time. The district serves 22,512 students
from grades K-12. The district supports a full inclusion model (based on the BC Ministry of
Education definition) for elementary students – all students attend their neighborhood school
and are enrolled in regular education classrooms. Support services are provided in school and
in class to facilitate inclusion. Students in the schools speak more than 57 languages, and
more than 60% of the student population is learning English as a second language.
Schools
Five elementary schools participated in the study (see Table 1). All schools enrolled
students from K- Grade 7. Treatment group classes and control group classes were located in
separate schools, to avoid transference of program materials/ideas. Two schools served as
treatment schools. Teachers in the schools participating in the study supported each other
through co-planning and discussion. Three schools served as control group schools, and no
intervention was made in these schools between pre and post testing.
35
Table 1
School Demographic Data
Group School # Number of
classrooms
/teachers
involved
Total
Student
Population
ESL % SES (%
Below
Poverty
Line)
Treatment 1 3 300 58% 26.4
Treatment 2 2 403 67% 33.2
Control 3 1 300 48% 26.4
Control 4 2 507 72% 19.3
Control 5 1 385 56% 33.2
Teachers. Teachers involved in the study ranged in experience, age, and education
level (see Table 2).
36
Table 2
Teacher’s Demographic Data
Teacher # Age Experience Education Level
1 54 15 Masters
2 60 36 Bachelors
3 45 8 Bachelors
4 59 19 Post Baccalaureate
5 38 6 Bachelors
6 56 18 Masters
7 32 5 Bachelors
8 59 24 Post Baccalaureate
9 41 2 Bachelors
Students. Two hundred and eighteen students from grades 4-7 took part in the study
(See Table 3 for demographic information). Forty-nine and a half percent were boys, while
50.5% percent were girls. Mean age was 11 years. Students for whom English was a second
language made up 67.4% of the sample, which is common in the Lower Mainland of British
Columbia. The dominant languages spoken were Asian in origin; for specific breakdowns of
first language spoken, see Table 3. The treatment group consisted of 121 students, while the
control group had 97 students. Chi square analyses were used to investigate any group
differences, including differences in gender, age, first language, and ability. A significant
difference was found for grade (X2 [3,N=218]=7.754, p<.051), with the treatment group
37
having more grade fives, while the control group had more grade sixes. All subsequent
analyses controlled for grade.
38
Table 3
Student Demographic Data
Category Treatment Group Control Group Total
4 34 23 57
5 28 12 40
6 18 26 44
Grade
7 41 36 77
9 years 34 22 56
10 years 28 13 41
11 years 18 26 44
12 years 40 36 76
Age
13 years _1 0 _1
Gender Male 59 49 108
Female 62 48 110
English 45 26 71
Chinese 56 44 100
Punjabi 1 4 5
Tagalog 11 8 19
Spanish 1 2 3
First
Language
Other 7 12 19
Ability Exceptional Needs 20 16 36
Typical 101 81 182
39
Participation in the study was high (see Table 4 for specifics), with 94% of eligible students
participating. Students who had moderate to severe cognitive disabilities, or who had not
developed sufficient proficiency in the English language to take part in the programs’
activities and complete measurement scales and interviews were excluded from the study.
Table 4
Participation Rates by Classroom
Classroom # Grade Level Group Participants
/Eligible
Participants
% Participation
1 7 Treatment 22/26 85
2 4/5 Treatment 23/23 100
3 5/6 Treatment 24/24 100
4 4/5 Treatment 24/27 89
5 6/7 Treatment 28/28 100
6 6/7 Control 25/26 96
7 6/7 Control 22/25 88
8 5/6 Control 27/27 100
9 4 Control 23/25 92
Total Participation 218 94
40
The Intervention
Training Procedures
 SEL programs, no matter how well developed, researched, and acclaimed, can only
be successful with appropriate implementation. When important program components are not
delivered, or are altered, or when pacing or affective quality is changed, program outcomes
can be affected. Previous research has indicated five components of successful
implementation: (a) the degree to which program components were delivered as prescribed
(adherence), (b) the frequency and duration of the program administered (dosage), (c)
qualitative aspects of the program delivery (e.g. content, affective quality), (d) participant
responsiveness, and (e) program differentiation - the extent to which only the experimental
group received the intervention, (Domitrovich & Greenberg, 2000).
Few studies in the literature have throughly investigated implementation. In their
review, Domitrovich and Greenberg (2000) found that only 21% of studies investigated more
than one dimension of implementation, despite linking variability in implementation indices
to program outcomes. Dane and Schneider (1998) differentiated between strategies that
promote integrity and implementation, and procedures that verify them. For instance,
creating a manual with clear instructions and training of program deliverers promotes
implementation, while meeting with deliverers throughout the intervention period and having
them keep records of adherence, dosage, etc. verifies implementation.
To promote program implementation, intervention teachers attended a three hour
training workshop with the author and were provided with a manual detailing lesson plans,
extensions, etc. (see Appendix A). Weekly consultation and observation meetings were held
on an individual basis, intended to enhance the quality of implementation through modeling,
41
coaching, and providing ongoing feedback regarding program delivery. At times these
meetings were one to one after school, and at other times, took place in the classroom with
students present, during RD lessons. At these times, the author co-taught lessons, gave
feedback to the teachers, or clarified ideas for students when requested to do so.
To verify implementation, teachers were asked to keep records of any changes they
made to lesson plans, dosage, their feelings about each section/lesson, and the reponses of the
children. Teachers also kept records of the extensions of the program, for instance, the
frequency of use of the language of multiple intelligences across the curriculum, references
to program lessons, etc. Finally, teachers were surveyed at the end of the program to
ascertain their feelings about the RD program, and the extent to which it was extended
throughout their teaching (see Appendix B).
Program Procedure
 Quality SEL programs have been found to share several common characteristics.
They view students as active learners, and employ interactive techniques such as group work,
discussions, cooperative learning, and role-plays (Graczyk et al., 2000). The RD program
involves nine introductory lessons in which students explore their own learning strengths and
challenges, and those of others in their community (see Appendix A). They work both
individually and in small groups on tasks that require a variety of intelligences/approaches,
and discuss how their strengths, and the strengths of others, are reflected in task outcomes.
They complete a survey which identifies their strengths and challenges by intelligence and
explore career options related to their profile. They engage in role-plays and discussions
concerning what the world would be like without different types of diversity. Students also
study brain anatomy to gain an understanding of how different learning profiles all reflect
42
strengths in different aspects of brain function, and are equally "smart" and important to a
community's survival. All of these lessons are in keeping with British Columbia Ministry of
Education “Health and Career Education” (2006) learning outcomes for these grade levels,
and thus posed no ethical risk to participants. Teachers were encouraged to use the
vocabulary and framework of multiple intelligences theory throughout their curriculum to
connect this program to the everyday life of the classroom. Resources were provided to
teachers to facilitate their ability to plan science, social studies, math, and literacy activities
using an MI framework.
Data Collection
The school district in which the study was conducted has a formal process for
application to conduct research. Once district permission was received, principals were
approached at a meeting to recruit volunteers to participate in the study. Five principals
volunteered. Teachers within these five schools were then presented with the opportunity to
take part in the study at school based staff meetings. Nine teachers volunteered, and all were
included in the study. Classes were divided into upper intermediate (grade 6/7) classes, and
lower intermediate (grade 4/5) classes, and then randomly assigned to treatment or control
groups. Following this, parental consent and student assent were sought and received.
Teachers were asked to send home and collect consent forms from parents (using active
consent). The researcher then introduced the study to the students, and assent was sought in
writing. Thus teachers, parents, and students were all asked to actively give consent/assent to
the study. As schools are often reluctant to have students placed in non-treatment groups, it
has been suggested that analyses that utilize a phase-in of a program over time may lead to
more acceptable design models for collaboration between schools and researchers
43
(Greenberg, 2004). Thus, subsequent to the end of data collection, teachers from the control
group classrooms were trained in the RD program, so as not to deny any of the participants
its benefits.
Each child was individually assessed twice, pre- and post-intervention, over a two
month period. Multiple measures, including qualitative and quantitative measures, were used
to assess all five variables (self- awareness, self-respect, social awareness, respect for others,
and class climate) (see Appendix C). Completion of these scales took approximately an hour
each time (i.e., one hour pre-intervention, and one hour post-intervention).
Measures
Many of the quantitative scales used were created and/or utilized by the Child
Development Project (CDP), a consortium involved in designing and assessing SEL
programs (scales can be attained from their website, http://www.devstu.org/cdp/).
1. Scales of Self-Awareness:
a. The Revised Self-Consciousness Scale, (Scheier & Carver, 1985) includes
sub-scales on private and public self-consciousness. This measure has been
used in a wide variety of studies, and reports internal consistency of .75 and
.84, respectively. Test-retest reliability was also reported at .76 and .74,
respectively. The private self-consciousness scale focuses on children’s
“tendency to think about and attend to the more covert, hidden aspects of
self…for example, one’s privately held beliefs, aspirations, values, and
feelings.” (p 687). Items such as “I generally pay attention to my feelings” and
“I’m constantly thinking about my reasons for doing things” measure
children’s inner awareness and propensity for reflective thinking. Public self-
44
consciousness refers to an awareness of those aspects of self observed by
others and the import given to how one is perceived by others. Items such as
“I care a lot about how I present myself to others” and “I’m concerned about
what other people think of me” are used to assess students’ degree of
reflectivity regarding the impression they create of themselves in social
settings.
2. Scales of Self-Respect:
a. Two subscales of the Marsh Self-Description Questionnaire (SDQ) (Marsh,
1992) were used to measure students’ self-respect. The Academic Self
Concept Subscale was used to assess participants’ respect for their abilities
and accomplishments in school. Reliability for this subscale was reported at
.89. Items such as “I learn things quickly in all school subjects” and “I like to
try challenging projects/activities” reflect students’ confidence and emotional
involvement in an academic realm. In addition, the General Self Concept
Subscale was used to measure students’ respect for their abilities and
accomplishments outside of school. Reliability for this subscale was reported
as .89. Items such as “I have a lot to be proud of” and “In general, I like being
the way I am” reflect students’ acceptance of their strengths, achievements,
and challenges in and out of school.
b. In addition to the SDQ, items from the self-efficacy, emotional control, and
relationships with peers subscales of the Resiliency Inventory (RI) (Song,
2004), were used to assess students’ belief in their ability to achieve their
goals, emotional management, and their sense of belonging within a social
45
network. Items such as “When there is a lot to think about or do, I can break it
into smaller pieces and handle one thing at a time until everything gets done”
and “I am popular among friends” reflect these factors.
3. Scales of Social Awareness:
a. The Perspective Taking subscale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI)
(Davis, 1983) was used to assess students’ awareness of others’ points of
view. Reliability for this subscale was reported as .79. Items such as “I know
when people are upset, even when they say nothing” and “It’s easy for me to
understand why other people do the things they do” reflect students’ comfort
with the skills involved in perspective taking.
b. As well, the Compliance Goals subscale of the Social Goals Questionnaire
(Wentzel, 1993) measures the import children give to others’ perspectives,
with items such as “How often do you think about how your behavior will
affect other kids? Reliability for this subscale was reported as .74.
c. Finally, the Extrinsic Motivation scale (CDP) assesses the motivations behind
children’s helping behavior. Children who help “Because I want to get a
reward or praise from the teacher” are aware of how they are perceived by
others, but are not empathically motivated. Internal consistency for this scale
is reported as .68.
4. Scales of Social Respect:
a. The Empathic Concern subscale of the Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI)
(Davis, 1983) was used to assess students’ concern for others and prosocial
46
behavior. Items such as “I often feel sorry for other children who are sad or in
trouble” and “I try to understand how other kids feel before I decide what to say
to them” reflect students’ empathic thinking and behavior. Reliability for this
subscale was reported as .80.
b. As well, the Prosocial Goals subscale of the Social Goals Questionnaire
(Wentzel, 1993) was used to investigate the degree of thought and import given to
setting prosocial goals. Items such as “How often do you try to be nice to kids
when something bad has happened to them?” and “How often do you try to help
your classmates learn new things?” reflect students’ empathic and helping
behaviors. Reliability for this subscale was reported as .84. An additional item
(“How often do you try to choose a partner with a different learning strength or
language than you?”) was added to this scale to explore students’ willingness to
work with diverse others.
c. The Altruistic Behavior subscale of the Intrinsic Prosocial Motivation scale
(CDP) was used to assess the degree of students’ prosocial motivation behind
their helping behaviors. Reliability for this subscale was reported as .82.
d. Seven items from the CDP’s classroom supportiveness scale were adapted by
changing the prefix “In my class kids…” to “I” to assess students’ willingness
to work with diverse others, be supportive and encouraging, and take pride in
the achievements of others. For instance, the item “In my class kids care about
my work as much as their own” was converted to “I care about my
classmates’ work as much as my own”.
47
e. Finally, the “Acceptance of Outgroups” scale (CDP) was used to assess
students’ attitudes towards people different from themselves. Reliability for
this scale was reported as being between .81-.85.
5. Scales of classroom climate
a. To assess changes in classroom climate, the CDP –Student Autonomy and
influence in the classroom and Classroom supportiveness and safety subscales of
the “Sense of school as a classroom community” instrument was used. This scale
explores students’ perspectives on the degree of student input and autonomy
available in their classroom, and their feeling of safety and supportiveness as
defined by such factors as the presence of respectful interactions, and helping
behaviors, the feeling of caring, and the degree to which the learning community
shared vision and goals. Reliability for these subscales was reported as .81 for the
Student Autonomy and influence in the classroom subscale and .85 for the
Classroom supportiveness and Safety subscale. The scale has been shown to be
strongly correlated with observational measures of student supportive and friendly
behavior (r = .60, p < .001), and student spontaneous prosocial behavior (r = .61,
p < .001) (Battistich, Solomon, Watson, & Schaps, 1994).
b. In addition, the Global Portrait of Social and Moral Health for Youth
(GPSMHY) (Davidson & Kmelkov, 2006) scale was used to assess students’
attitudes and behaviors relating to valuing diversity, and the extent of shared
vision and goals present in their classroom. Items such as “Kids here do not talk
to or include those who are different” and “Kids believe that working together,
they can bring about a change in their school or community” are scored on a 5
48
point scale from completely disagree to completely agree. Reliability for this scale
is reported as .73.
c. Finally, the “Louvain Loneliness Scale for Children and Adolescents”
(Marcoen, Goossens, & Caes, 1987) was used to assess the degree of
belongingness/alienation and loneliness students experience in their classroom
before and after the RD program. Reliability for this scale was reported as .87.
6. Interviews were conducted pre and post intervention regarding participants’
experiences of self and social awareness and respect and experience of the program (post
intervention), with a targeted sample. This sample of participants was chosen to represent
gender and age/grade balance, and a subset of students with learning disabilities and
recent immigrants for selective analysis. These interviews took several forms:
a. In the initial interview, a semi-structured interview exploring students’
experiences of diversity and respect was conducted (see Appendix D). As well, a
case study/scenario depiction (e.g., a scenario of a student who struggles to read)
was used with questions that focus on perspective taking ability (social
awareness), attitudes to diverse others, and empathy (respect for others) (see
Appendix E).
b. Post intervention, a semi-structured interview exploring targeted students’
experiences of diversity, respect, and the RD program was undertaken (see
Appendix D). As well, a second case study/scenario depiction was utilized (see
Appendix E).
Teachers were also asked to complete the aggressive with peers (alpha = .89-.92),
excluded by peers (alpha = .93-.96), and prosocial with peers (alpha = .91-.92) subscales of
49
The Child Behavior Scale (Ladd & Profilet, 1996) to triangulate children’s self-reports
related to respect for others and classroom climate with teacher observations of children’s
behavior. This “multiple informant strategy” (Caprara & Pastorelli, 1993, p.19) has become a
common framework for research in SEL and child behavior.
50
CHAPTER 3
Results
Qualitative Student Data
Interviews were conducted by a research assistant who was both a practicing teacher
with students of this age, and a graduate student in Education. Interviews were conducted in
the students’ home schools during school hours. Interviews were then transcribed verbatim.
Responses to interviews were initially coded by this same research assistant, who was
familiar with the process of thematic content analysis, but unfamiliar with the goals of this
study. Subsequently, the research assistant was given the operational definitions of the five
dependent variables, and asked to look for comments related to these variables. The author
then coded the same interviews thematically, looking for content related to self-awareness,
self-respect, social awareness, respect for others, and any other themes that emerged. These
categorizations of statements from students related to the five themes were then compared to
those surfaced by the research assistant, to ensure reliability. Reliability was calculated for a
sub-sample of ten interviews, achieving 92% agreement. As quantitative data revealed no
significant differences in outcomes for students with learning disabilities or for whom
English is a second language, students responses were coded together as coming from a
single pool.
Quantitative Student Data
Data were examined using a process recommended by Hair, Anderson, Tatham, and
Black (1998). Initially, negative items were recoded. Data from the scales for each variable
were then aggregated to assess changes in class climate and self and social awareness and
51
respect pre and post intervention. Reliability was computed for each scale; all scales had
reliability (coefficient alpha) greater than .7 (see Table 5).
Table 5
Scale Reliability Coefficients
Scale Reliability (Pretest) Reliability (Posttest)
Revised Self-Consciousness Scale .79 .83
Marsh Self-Description Questionnaire .92 .90
Resiliency Inventory (RI) .90 .90
Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) .91 .93
Social Goals Questionnaire .91 .91
Acceptance of Outgroups .88 .88
Sense of school as a classroom community:
Student autonomy and influence in the
classroom
.80 .87
Sense of school as a classroom community:
Classroom Supportiveness, Safety
.81 .85
Global Portrait of Social and Moral Health
for Youth
.70 .70
Louvain Loneliness Scale for Children and
Adolescents
.91 .92
The Child Behavior Scale .79 .84
52
The five dependent variables studied are all conceptual groupings. For instance, selfawareness is understood theoretically to be a combination of factors such as an awareness of
how one is perceived by others, emotional awareness, reflective thinking, etc. (see Appendix
I for detailed information). Similarly, self-respect includes such attitudes and skills as
accepting one’s strengths and challenges, taking pride in accomplishments, being
emotionally involved in school, and seeking help when appropriate. Thus it was expected
that, statistically, each of the five dependent variables would be composed of several subfactors that loaded onto the main factor. A factor analysis was conducted, and items from
each conceptual grouping were loaded onto a single factor to determine if they were, in fact,
related. Each of the five main factors explained from 30-50% of the variance, indicating a
significant single factor for each aggregated variable, in addition to several smaller, subfactors, as would be expected from the theoretical framework underpinning the study.
Following this, scales were aggregated (i.e. the items of all scales for each dependent
variable were combined into a single measure) and reliability coefficients calculated to
determine whether scales correlated with each other, as a second measure of relationship
between the scales/factors. Alpha reliability scores for all five aggregated scales were above
.7 (see Table 6).
53
Table 6
Aggregated Scale Reliability Coefficients
Aggregate Variable Reliability Pretest Reliability Posttest
Self-Awareness .79 .83
Self-Respect:
 SDQ
 RI
.94 .93
Awareness of Others
 IRI
 SGQ
.88 .89
Respect for Others
 IRI
 SGQ
 Classroom
Supportiveness
 Acceptance of
Outgroups
.94 .94
Class Climate
 Classroom
Supportiveness
 Student Autonomy
 GPSMHY
 Louvain
.77 .79
54
Histograms were used to check for a normal distribution, and all data fit this criterion.
Group means were then checked for any pretest differences in terms of demographics and
pretest composite scores. As mentioned in the previous chapter, chi-square analyses showed
no pretest group differences for sex, age, number of students with exceptional needs, SES, or
ESL level, but did show a significant difference for grade level. Thus all subsequent analyses
controlled for this factor.
Between groups differences on pretest scores were not significant (Table 7).
Table 7
Comparison of Pretest Scores across Treatment Groups
Aggregate Variable F Significance level
Self-Awareness 1.703 .193
Self-Respect 2.104 .148
Awareness of Others 1.373 .243
Respect for Others .817 .367
Class Climate .609 .436
Missing data were then examined for patterns; none were found by individual or by
item/scale. There are many arguments regarding the best ways to deal with missing data
(Hair et al., 1998). For this reason, analyses were run twice, first with complete cases only,
and then using imputation for missing data. In the case of the imputed analyses, missing data
were replaced with the mean for that individual student on the scale involved.
55
As the dependent variables were aggregated, a principal components analysis was used to
calculate factor scores for each of the five dependent variables, providing weighted scores for
each. Using these weighted scores, a repeated measures MANCOVA was then computed
using complete cases only, controlling for grade, with treatment group, sex, and ESL status
and interactions examined, F (5, 141) = 8.88, p =000. A second repeated measures
MANCOVA was then computed using imputed means and principal components, controlling
for grade, with treatment group, sex, and ESL status and interactions examined, F(1, 209) =
23.244, p =.000. Finally, a MANCOVA was computed using a complex plan to control for
nesting effects , F(1, 209) = 20.575, p =000. These results were all significant at the .01 level,
thus demonstrating that the nesting of students in classrooms, and classrooms in schools, did
not significantly impact results. Thus, the reported values are from the second (imputed
means) MANCOVA, as it allowed for the greatest power and a repeated measures analysis
(see Table 8).
Table 8
MANCOVA Results
Aggregate Variable df F partial η
Overall 5,204 14.267* .23
Self-Awareness 1,209 23.244* .10
Self-Respect 1,209 48.635* .17
Awareness of Others 1,209 23.974* .08
Respect for Others 1,209 32.817* .13
Class Climate 1,209 42.411* .13
* = p<.01
56
Qualitative Teacher Data (Implementation and Program Effects)
As implementation data were collected from treatment teachers only (n=5), data were
analyzed by means of descriptive statistics only, and a thematic analysis completed of
teachers’ comments at the end of the program.
Quantitative Teacher Data (Student Behavior)
A similar process was undertaken for teacher data as was done with student data.
There were no missing data. Thus, a principal components analysis was used to calculate
factor scores. Using these weighted scores, a repeated measures MANCOVA was then
computed controlling for grade, with treatment group, sex, and ESL status and interactions
examined.
These methods of analyses were conducted to allow for evaluation of the efficacy of the
program; guide future research; and lend direction to the program’s refinement in an effort to
support the social and emotional development of diverse students.
Student Experiences in Diverse Classrooms
Question #1 – “How aware of their own and others’ learning and social/emotional
experiences are intermediate students in inclusive, diverse classrooms?”
Before the program began, students were interviewed to explore their understanding
of self and social awareness, and their personal experiences in diverse classrooms. Students
supported many of the definitions in the extant literature related to self-awareness – they
explained it primarily as being related to recognizing emotions, and being aware of how they
are perceived by others. They spoke of a person who was aware of how they were perceived
by others as “caring about what you do, your actions” (grade 6). Many students talked about
the effects of bullying as illustrative of their emotional awareness. “If somebody hurts you,
57
your heart, you feel like broken in some way” (grade 6). Students also associated awareness
with respect. Several students commented that one had to be a reflective, self-aware person to
be respectful of self and others because “respect comes from your inner body, in your mind,
because you think about it” (grade 4).
The schools in which these students were enrolled were very multicultural, so it is not
surprising to find that students discussed diversity and awareness of others most often in
cultural terms, rather than in terms of abilities, challenges, or affinities. For example, “There
are a lot of people from different places around the world” (grade 5) and “lots of different
people in my class have different cultures” (grade 7). Perspective taking was rarely
discussed, except in the case of helping behaviors and avoiding negative interactions, such as
“you help but don’t do it for them” (grade 5) and “you don’t go into other people’s business
and boss them around” (grade 7).
Question #2 – “How is respect for self and others experienced/demonstrated by students in
intermediate inclusive, diverse classrooms?”
Students confirmed many of the factors associated with self-respect and respect for
others in the literature, and also added some interesting qualities of their own. Again,
students did not refer to the concepts of strengths and challenges, but instead talked about
“being positive” (grade 7) and “confident” (grade 7). One student defined self-respect as “I
had courage” (grade 5); another as “I am proud of myself” (grade 6). Students defined
resiliency in terms of perseverence. “You don’t put yourself down because you have done
something wrong. You’re trying to fix your mistakes and go back and try to improve” (grade
6). Several students referred to self-respect as avoiding self-destructive behaviors such as
“not putting myself down” (grade 5) and “not doing bad stuff with yourself” (grade 6).
58
Students also added a new aspect of a youthful definition of self-respect not discussed
in the literature. Interestingly, given the current concern about childhood obesity and
dropping physical activity levels, students discussed healthy living as an aspect of selfrespect. They discussed taking care of yourself physically, such as eating healthy foods and
exercising. One student remarked “I think I respect myself because I work out everyday. I
have good hygiene” (grade 7). Students also commented that someone who has self-respect is
independent, or does not just follow the crowd; instead, they “make their own choices”
(grade 6).
Students had a lot to say about respect for others. Again, students confirmed many of
the factors associated with respect for others in the literature, but also added some unique
interpretations. Students spoke of being respectful as showing empathy and kindness. “You
respect others feelings” (grade 4) and “you are kind to them” (grade 5). The multicultural
emphasis continued in their discussion of valuing diversity as an aspect of respect for others.
Students talked about attending school with students from other countries and cultures as
being an opportunity. “You can learn from different cultures; people think differently and
that’s a good thing” (grade 6) and “it’s better with different – you get to learn from others”
(grade 4). A truly respectful person, one student commented, “makes friends with someone
they don’t normally talk to” (grade 6). Students did not refer to diversity in terms of abilities
and interests except in one student’s case, who spoke of a classmate with autism and said,
“You shouldn’t make fun of her” (grade 4). As before, students referred frequently to the
absence of negative behaviors as defining respect for others. You are respectful when “you
don’t hurt others, put them down, touch their stuff, etc.” (grade 4).
59
Students also added some interesting insights into what respect for others looks like
in the pre-teen years. They talked about issues such as fairness (a respectful person treats
others fairly) and admiration – respecting someone means you “think someone else is good at
something” (grade 6). Respectful people, they said, are “friendly” and “share.” Students also
repeated a lot of definitions from school settings. Being respectful means you “listen,” “pay
attention,” “raise your hand,” “don’t distract others, etc.” Students also referred to respectful
people as having good manners; “be polite.” Interestingly, many students linked respect for
others with self-awareness and respect. A respectful person, they said, has a conscience. “My
heart tells me to say I’m sorry” (grade 5) and knows “being respectful is a choice, and I
choose to be respectful” (grade 6).
Formative Evaluation of the RD Program
Question #3 – “Is the social and emotional development of students in diverse elementary
classrooms facilitated by Multiple Intelligences curriculum and teaching, as measured by
students’ self and social awareness and respect?”
Overall MANCOVA results indicated significant differences post intervention between
treatment and control groups, F(5, 204) = 14.267, p=.000, with treatment group students
increasing overall SEL scores, and control group students decreasing. This pattern of
decreasing scores for control groups (i.e., students who have had no intervention for SEL), is
commonly found in the literature (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 1999).
Partial η for this MANCOVA was .23, which is considered to have “practical significance”
in social sciences research (Barnett, 2008). According to Cohen (2003), large effect sizes are
rarely found in education; small to moderate effect sizes predominate (see for instance,
DuBois, Holloway, Valentine & Cooper, 2002; Durlak & Weissberg, 2007).
60
Univariate tests were then used to determine specific relationships between treatment
groups and the five dependent variables, in an effort to answer the following questions.
1. Is there a significant difference in students’ self-awareness and respect following an
introduction to multiple intelligences theory and individual and group demystification
regarding the value of diverse learning profiles?
a. Quantitative Student Data. Results indicated significant differences in the
change from pre to posttest scores between treatment and control groups for
both self-awareness, F(1, 209) = 23.244, p =.000, partial η = .10, and selfrespect F(1, 209) = 48.635, p =.000, partial η = .17. However, these results
were opposite in direction. Students in the treatment group decreased in selfawareness, while students in the control group increased (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Means for self-awareness by treatment group.
However, students from the treatment group increased in self-respect, while
students from the control group decreased (Figure 2).
61
Figure 2. Means for self-respect by treatment group.
b. Qualitative Student Data. Students’ definitions and feelings of self-awareness
and respect changed significantly following the intervention. When asked,
“Did this program change the way you think about yourself?” students
overwhelmingly replied yes, and went on to describe how exploring their
strengths and challenges had impacted their sense of self. “It feels like I’m
learning the inside of my body,” (grade 7) one student remarked. “It was
enlightening – interesting to find out what our strengths and challenges were”
(grade 6). Students noted that they had rarely thought about their learning
profile before. “Before I was confused, like which way I am good at … I
thought I didn’t know that much about myself. I felt good” (grade 7). They
felt more comfortable and accepting of themselves. “I know my strengths and
I know what I need to improve, and it’s ok” (grade 7). Several students
commented that this new found knowledge had encouraged them to set goals,
62
take risks with their learning, and persevere through challenges. “You set a
goal with your weakness and you challenge yourself” (grade 7); “it feels like I
can think about my future and do some plans” (grade 7). Some students also
expressed a greater comfort level with themselves and how others perceived
them. “I felt like I could finally show people that I learn this way and not that
way. I’m sort of proud of it. I’m a little more happy because these people
know” (grade 4). Another student remarked, “I liked learning about the
intelligences because it wouldn’t look bad if just I wasn’t good at this one
thing” (grade 5). This sense of belonging, of not being alone, was mentioned
on several occasions. “You feel like you’re not the only one, and it’s ok”
(grade 4). Students felt they had become more confident and resilient in their
sense of self “even when everyone else says you’re dumb you’re like just
because I can’t do this doesn’t mean I’m dumb. I’m just as smart as them,
even smarter” (grade 4). This confidence allowed students to become more
comfortable with exposing their challenges and asking for help. “I know what
I’m good at and what I need help in and there’s lots of people that could help
me” (grade 6). Perhaps most succinctly put, “Like about myself, I can like,
um, about the inside of my body…I can let it out” (grade 7).
c. Qualitative teacher data. Teachers felt the program impacted students’ selfesteem and their understanding of their unique learning profile. “It is a good
way for students to understand that just because they find certain areas of
school work challenging, they are not dumb. In fact, they are all smart in some
way – this builds their self-esteem.”
63
2. Is there a significant difference in students’ social awareness and respect following an
introduction to multiple intelligences theory and individual and group demystification
regarding the value of diverse learning profiles?
a. Quantitative Student Data. Results indicated significant differences between
treatment and control groups for awareness of others, F(1, 209) = 23.974, p
=.000, partial η = .08, respect for others, F(1, 209) = 32.817, p =.000, partial
η = .13 and class climate F (1, 209) = 42.411, p =.000, partial η = .13. In all
three cases, scores for students from the treatment group increased, while
scores for students from the control group decreased (Figures 3, 4, and 5).
Figure 3. Means for awareness of others by treatment group.
64
Figure 4. Means for respect for others by treatment group.
Figure 5. Means for class climate by treatment group.
b. Qualitative Student Data. When asked whether the program “had changed
how you think about others,” students articulated a variety of attitudes, skills,
and knowledge gained through their experiences with the RD program that
impacted their relationships with others. Students expressed a growing
awareness of the different strengths and challenges experienced by their peers,
“knowing that everyone learns differently than you – it makes me understand
that there’s different smarts – everyone is smart in different ways” (grade 4).
65
This increased students’ awareness of the perspectives of others when facing a
challenge they did not share; “I really understood how they felt to be like that,
how it would be harder” (grade 4). This understanding, in turn, impacted their
attitudes and behavior towards these peers. “I can get to know them and know
what their strengths are and what are their weaknesses like that. So I didn’t
bully them about that” (grade 7). One student described how this awareness
had allowed him to initiate friendships with diverse others he might not have
previously associated with. “I can like know their strengths and maybe I could
be friends with them and stuff” (grade 5). Many students expressed how they
had come to empathize with the diverse learners in their class. “Before when I
saw someone act a little different I was like, I think they are a little weird but
now after I’ve seen this, I realize they’re all the same as us, they just might act
a little different cause they have challenges” (grade 7). Students developed
empathy for diverse others. “You care for other people, and you think about
their feelings” (grade 5). In particular, students expressed how the lesson
about challenges associated with each intelligence had increased their
empathy for people with disabilities. “I realized how hard it is for disabled
people to live. A lot of people are special in their own way – I should have
known that before” (grade 5). Students differentiated this from pity, however.
“I don’t feel bad for them; it just taught me something so I know that
everybody has strengths. It feels ok. It feels good” (grade 6). In fact, students
learned to appreciate the value of diversity for their lives. “It made me realize
how the world would be without the MIs and how difficult it would be for
66
people” (grade 7). “If you didn’t have different smarts, the world would be
just like one thing and it would be a mess kind of” (grade 4). One student
summed it up: “It’s good to have different” (grade 4).
This attitude translated into behavior that affected students’ interactions
and the class climate. Students talked about how they treated each other with
respect. “They help you and help you get better in other subjects and they
make you learn more” (grade 7). We “use our manners,” “share,” and “ask
what’s going on, do you have any problems, what’s on your mind?” (grade 5).
This also translated into a reduction of negative behaviors. “Before some
people might make fun of them and then when they like listen to it they stop
making fun of them” (grade 7). “It explained how other people with
disabilities feel, so people won’t go ‘haha you’re blind! Ahh ha!” (grade 6). In
fact, not only did negative behaviors reduce, positive support seemed to
increase. “If you are being teased by other people, they might stand up for
you, people tell them to stop”(grade 7), and “you just say that’s ok, you’ll get
better next time and just try to make them feel better” (grade 6). Students also
referred to a reduction in racist comments and attitudes. “You don’t talk
behind their back…just because they are from a different country” (grade 6).
Perhaps as a result of this understanding, students expressed a belief that
they had developed a sense of community in the classroom. “We help, sit next
to each other at lunch” (grade 5). “When they do something good, you respect
them kind of” (grade 4). One student expressed this feeling, “Since I started
talking, and started getting around, being partners and groups - I started to
67
learn more about how you have to work as a team, and um, to be good to each
other” (grade 7).
c. Quantitative Teacher Data. Teachers responded to two questions regarding
program effects:
i. “Generally, how do you feel now about the RD program?” on a five
point Likert scale ranging from very negative (1) to very positive (5).
Mean score for this response was 4.5.
ii. “Did the RD program have a positive effect on the students in your
class this year?” on a five point Likert scale ranging from “No, not
positive” to “Yes, very positive.” Mean score for this response was
4.0.
In addition, teachers filled out the Child Behavior Scale (Ladd & Profilet,
1996) for each student in their class, pre and post. Results indicated that teachers
saw a significant difference in overall student behavior, F. (1, 209) = 4.07, p =.045,
partial η = .11 with the treatment group increasing in positive behaviors and the
control group demonstrating fewer positive behaviors. Specifically, there was no
difference between groups in aggressive behaviors. However, prosocial behaviors
increased for students in treatment classes, and decreased for students in control
group classes, F(1, 209) = 5.15, p = .028, partial η = .15. As well, students in
treatment group classes were less excluded by peers F(1, 209) = 3.72, p = .05,
partial η = .10, and increased in social responsibility F(1, 209) = 3.9, p = .05 partial
η = .97. By contrast, students in control group classes experienced increased
exclusion, and decreased in social responsibility.
68
d. Qualitative teacher data. In general, teachers were quite positive about the
outcomes of the program. All five teachers involved commented they would
have liked to go deeper and spend more time, but heading into Christmas
holidays, report cards, etc. they felt pressed for time. Teachers felt the
program had helped the students to become better acquainted with one
another. “I liked the lesson with the community brain – it really helped the
students to appreciate each other. My students enjoyed the program.”
Teachers, like students, noted that there was a greater level of comfort in
facing challenges. “They realized how everyone can contribute and it’s ok to
ask for help.” “Students who had difficulties in specific areas, for example,
math, felt comfortable asking for help.” Several of the teachers commented in
particular on the final lesson – exploring disabilities associated with the
different intelligences. They felt this lesson had really impacted students’
understanding and behavior related to students with exceptional needs. “Most
students began to think seriously about what it would be like to be severely
challenged. They became more aware of our student with autism, and how
they can try and include her.”
Implementation
Implementation for all five teachers was uniformly high. All teachers completed all
nine lessons, and rated themselves as very engaged for each lesson with the exception of the
optional lesson (#8), which they rated as “somewhat engaged.” Adaptations were minimal,
such as adding an icon for each intelligence to the class poster, a sample flag for the class
brain, etc. Teachers did not feel the need to adapt the actual lesson sequence at all, although
69
some noted they did a bit of review such as, “Let’s remember the nine intelligences,” “tell
your partner what your strength was” at the beginning of the lessons to remind students of
what they had done previously. All teachers made some effort to extend the program across
the curriculum. All teachers reported extending the MI language and planning activities
based on MI into language arts, social studies, mathematics, and personal planning curricula.
However, the frequency of this extension varied widely, from “once or twice” to daily
extension. CHAPTER 4
Discussion
Poet Carl Sandburg once said that the worst word in the English language is exclude.
In recent years, the educational systems in both the United States and Canada have
undergone significant educational reforms, including a movement toward inclusive education
that places children of diverse racial, cultural and linguistic backgrounds, socio-economic
status, and learning abilities together in regular education classrooms. If we are to include,
however, we must build a compassionate learning community that recognizes the deeper
needs of the human soul, including a sense of safety, of belonging, of being a part of
something meaningful. This leads to lifelong understanding of who we are, why we’re here,
and what we have to contribute (Palmer, 2007). Learning cannot be separated from living.
The human mind cannot learn when overcome with a sense of anxiety, alienation, and stress
(Grover, Ginsburg, & Ialongo, 2007). If we are to build a less violent and more
compassionate world, we need to nurture a deeper sense of self in our children, while
expanding their ability to empathize with and value diverse others (Miller, 1998/99).
Palmer (1998/99) described a “system of education so fearful of things spiritual that it
fails to address the real issues of our lives – dispensing facts at the expense of meaning,
information at the expense of wisdom. The price is a school system that alienates and dulls
us” (p. 6). At the same time, demands to prepare students for a global world require
expanded curriculum, technological knowledge and skills, and higher literacy rates than ever
before. Teachers struggle to balance the demands on time and energy, their own and that of
their students. Thus, to combat alienation, growing rates of depression, substance abuse, and
suicide (Modrcin-McCarthy & Dalton, 1996), and at the same time meet academic and
71
curricular demands, schools must begin to explore instructional frameworks that integrate a
spiritual paradigm with academic learning.
By spiritual, I do not mean religious. Rather, spiritual education means teaching to the
heart and mind. It means exploring the deeper meanings of what we learn, connecting with
the community we learn and live with, and coming to know ourselves. Palmer describes
spiritual questions of a general nature, such as, “Does my life have meaning and purpose?”,
“Do I have gifts that the world wants and needs?” and discipline specific questions, such as,
“Why does a historian care about the ‘dead’ past?” and “Why does a biologist care about
‘mute’ nature?” The answers always lie within our relationships to ourselves, our
community, and our world. It is in this form of inquiry learning that compassionate
classrooms evolve.
In response to the need for a curriculum that addresses curricular and spiritual issues,
the RD program was designed by teachers, for teachers. Developed initially in elementary
school classrooms, it has now been implemented K-12. The intent of the program is to
develop a compassionate classroom climate for diverse students, thereby supporting students’
social, emotional, and academic learning. Research in the field of SEL has identified four
interrelated constructs that, when developed, lay the foundation for students social and
emotional learning (Greenberg et al., 2001; Zins et al., 2004). Self-awareness and self-respect
allow children to feel confident in their abilities; set goals and persevere through challenges;
and develop the emotional coping skills necessary to stay healthy in the adolescent years.
They allow children to answer broad spiritual questions with a resounding, “YES!” Yes, my
life has meaning. Yes, I have gifts that the world wants and needs. Yes, I matter. Awareness
of and respect for others help children to develop social skills, build positive relationships,
72
and work cooperatively with diverse others – skills necessary for employability and personal
well-being across the life span. They allow children to develop a sense of being a part of
something bigger than themselves, of connection to a living community, a living planet. The
purpose of this study was to hear directly from the children about their experiences in
diverse, inclusive classrooms, and to explore the outcomes of the RD program relevant to
these four social and emotional factors – to the development of the spirit.
Self-awareness and Self-respect
Before the program began, students defined self-awareness and self-respect in terms
of emotional regulation and self-confidence in both academic and social situations. By the
end of the program, students had broadened their definition to one that included more focus
on a metacognitive awareness of how they learned, their strengths and challenges, and what
they had to contribute to their learning community. This allowed students to feel more
comfortable taking risks, because, after all, “everyone has challenges”, and to persevere
through these challenges. Quantitative data indicated a significant increase in treatment group
self-respect. In contrast, self-awareness decreased for treatment group participants. This
finding appears to be contradictory to past findings regarding the association between selfawareness and self-respect (e.g., Weissberg et al, 2004). However, the current finding may
have been due to the instrument used to measure self-awareness. This scale was a measure of
“self-consciousness,” and included items such as “I’m always trying to figure myself out”,
and “I usually worry about making a good impression.” While the authors hoped this would
assess students’ reflective tendencies and awareness of how they were perceived by others,
students appear to have interpreted this as a negative statement; that is, someone who
“worries” about their appearance/image actually lacks self-respect or confidence. Interviews
73
conducted post-analyses confirm this interpretation. Thus, self-awareness, in this definition
(i.e., being concerned about one’s image, feelings, or behavior) became negatively correlated
in participants’ minds with self-respect, a result born out by the statistical findings.
Metacognitive knowledge and skill are necessary precursors to students’ ability to be
motivationally and strategically active participants in their learning (Zimmerman, 1990).
Metacognition refers to the awareness that learners have about their general academic
strengths and weaknesses and of the cognitive resources they can apply to meet the demands
of particular tasks (Winne & Perry, 2000). Students appeared to enjoy the spiritual, inner
exploration and discovering their identity as a learner during the RD program. They used
words such as “thrilled”, “exciting” and “enlightening” to describe their experience. “It was
very educating. I felt pretty thrilled. Because I’ve never heard of some of the things I
learned” (grade 7). This development of students’ metacognitive knowledge, in the context of
a safe environment in which all students are recognized as having strengths and challenges
and both something to contribute and something to learn, is at the heart of the RD program.
Students and teachers felt that students had increased in self-awareness and respect – a
primary goal of the first four lessons of the RD program. When asked what the most valuable
lessons were in terms of “changing how you think about yourself,” students pointed to
learning about the intelligences and their learning profile. “I think it is so important that you
see what your strengths and challenges are” (grade 5) and the lessons exploring what the
world would be like without diversity “made me realize how the world would be without the
MIs, and how difficult it would be for people” (grade 7). These two concepts appeared to
give students the language for a metacognitive framework - “Now I know the scientific
names” (grade 4) - which in turn allows students to plan their learning (e.g., I learn best this
74
way); regulate their emotional experiences (this is one of my challenges, it’s ok); and seek
help when necessary (I need help with this, and I can help others with another task). Students
develop an inner core, a sense of self that allows them to cope with moments of challenge in
the present and hopefully into the future. When students believe in themselves, they are
better prepared to deal with challenging subjects, difficult peers, exams and other anxiety
provoking situations, even, yes, difficult teachers. As one student succinctly put it, “I learned
more about my intelligence. So now for every other program around the school I think – if
you know that you’re intelligent then nothing can get on you” (grade 4). Students came to
believe in themselves and felt that their peers and teachers believed in them. They had
learned to say yes.
“Believing in someone is a concern of the spirit, and it matters in the classroom.”
(Wesley, 1998/99).
Awareness of Others and Respect for Others
Ideally, preventative interventions help all students develop self-respect, while at the
same time building positive relationships and social networks within a classroom learning
community. In fostering a sense of interdependence amongst students, a sense of the
classroom as a supportive community emerged. “We help each other in things that we are not
that good at. We look at our community brain and if we are not that good at something but
we see someone who is we go ask them for help but then they don’t say that we are not good,
that we are dumb because they know we have strengths too” (grade 6). The classroom had
become so safe, one student said, “If you are down you don’t have to like say it’s always my
fault. You can talk to some people, talk about yourself. You can say ‘I suck at this’” (grade
6).
75
Diversity in these classrooms became a positive contributor to the academic and
social world. Students recognized the value of having classmates from a variety of cultures,
and with a variety of learning strengths, together in a learning community. “I like it. We have
different personalities, different languages, different sports, different intelligences, but inside
we are all alike” (grade 7). Another student remarked, “Everyone thinks differently that’s for
sure. Lots of people learn differently in different levels. But no one really pays attention to
that now. It’s more of the personalities that count” (grade 7).
When soul enters the classroom, fear drops away (Kessler, 1998/99). Students risk
exposing the pain or the shame that might be judged as weakness or stupidity- “Like umm,
like if you are down you don’t have to like say it’s always my fault. They can talk to some
people, talk about themselves. Yeah, like they, for example I suck at this” (grade 5). Opening
the window to the perspective of others, accepting what they thought shameful in themselves,
students discover compassion and begin to learn about forgiveness “Don’t think to yourself,
I’ve got such a bad mark on the test, I’m so stupid. Don’t think that” (grade 4). They develop
a deep sense of connection to themselves, to others, and to their world – and experience a
feeling of being known and understood (Kessler, 1998/99).
Perhaps Jay, a grade 7 student with a learning disability and severe behavior
problems, put it best. When asked what the most important thing he learned from the RD
program was, he said, “The most important thing I have learned about was people. People
such as me. How someone can shine a light on you even when you are in a dark place. How
all people have something to contribute. Some kids believe that there is no hope in life. That
they will always fail. But these children have never heard of hope for the better, of MI and
76
that there is something for you. I used to say that hope was a bunch of lying crap but I have
seen now that there is hope in the world for people like me and others.”
In “Resolving Ethical Dilemmas in the Classroom,” Rushworth Kidder (1998/99)
describes how, after many years of asking people what the core, universal spiritual values we
all share are, people inevitably reduce the list to five key terms: Compassion/Love,
Honesty/Truth, Fairness, Responsibility, and Respect. He went on to say:
Among educators, parents, and students, an agreement on core ethical values can:
 Help build a common language
 Help define a common purpose
 Develop and maintain trust
 Influence total school climate to enhance the teaching and learning goals
 Provide the basis on which to nurture the spirit, extend the inspirational and
holistic vectors, and create a deeper sense of meaningfulness. (p. 39 )
The most predominant finding in the qualitative analysis rests in the ability of
students of this age to reflect in profound and meaningful ways about their sense of self, their
respect for others, and the influence of the world around them. Students made clear that the
opportunity to explicitly engage in honest and open conversations about themselves, their
peers, and life in an inclusive, diverse, learning community had significant impact on self and
social respect “I guess I learned more about different people, how they feel, what goes on. It
kind of felt a little different, we never talked about this before, but it was enlightening I
would say. As it was interesting to find out what our strengths and weaknesses were. It sort
of felt a little better to know that well that um it’s sort of makes you feel better that you are
not the only one, and that you can understand other people” (grade 6).
77
Compassion is developed when we learn to value ourselves and others, to temper our
judgements with understanding, empathy, care and concern. Giving students the language,
opportunity, and support to reflect on self and others in a safe place can nurture and facilitate
the development of a compassionate learning community where all students experience
success both academically and socially. Many have commented on the inherent tension
between diverse cultural values and public education – but as Kidder’s work clearly shows,
few would argue with the desire to create and engender a compassionate, respectful attitude
in our students, our teachers, and our schools.
Strengths and Limitations
The RD program uses a multiple intelligences framework to provide teachers and
students with the language and conceptual basis to explore ethical and spiritual values that
can lead to the development of a compassionate classroom climate. By using an educational
framework such as MI, the program hopes to allow teachers to then connect students’
learning in the RD program to the rest of the curriculum, and throughout the year. Many
resources exist to support teachers in the use of an MI framework for curricular planning, but
no such resource existed to outline its use for the development of SEL. The RD program is
meant to fill that gap.
A second strength of the study was the opportunity to hear the voices of the children
themselves. Students had a lot to say about growing up in diverse, inclusive classrooms, and
while they certainly mentioned the presence at times of bullying and conflict, for the most
part, they were far more positive about their experiences than past research would indicate.
It is hoped that this study will lead to further exploration regarding the outcomes of
an MI / SEL framework. This study took place over a very short period of time, and being
78
before Christmas, teachers expressed frustration with the limited time they had to extend and
supplement the curriculum. For the same reason, the ability of the author to mentor and
support teachers, guide their delivery and extension, and follow up with students was limited.
Effect sizes were small, perhaps as a result. After the study took place, the author worked
with teachers to design science and social studies unit using an MI/RD framework. It would
have been interesting to assess teachers’ and students’ feelings and performance related to
these units. A more comprehensive study, beginning at the very start of the school year, and
extending throughout the year and beyond, will shed light on the long term effects of this
program. Further research is also necessary to explore academic outcomes, if any, of the RD
program.
As well, teachers in this study were a small group with support from the author and
each other. They were also volunteers, and therefore a sample biased towards implementing
an SEL program, hopeful about its outcomes, and with an interest in MI pedagogy. Without
carryover into all areas of the curriculum, there is little point in implementing the RD
program. Telling children that everyone is valuable regardless of their learning profile, and
then teaching and assessing through only one intelligence, would most likely undo any
positive results. Teachers, therefore, might require support to extend the RD program into
their teaching of science, social studies, literacy, and numeracy. Further study regarding
implementation, training, and their relation to outcomes is necessary, especially with regard
to school or district wide implementation, where some teachers’ attitudes/expectations may
be less positive, or teachers may feel less confident about their ability to implement/extend it.