This pilot study aims at evaluating the effectiveness and feasibility of the
SMART-Resilience program for secondary school students. The control trial
experiment design conducted involved a total of 72 secondary school students
in the Province of Bali. Resilience data was obtained using the 14 items of
Indonesian resilience scale. The six items of acceptability and feasibility
questions on the Likert’s model was used to conduct the experimental group
participant perception to the program, and an interview with the counsellor
facilitator of the program. Data of the effectiveness of the SMART-Resilience
intervention were analysed with ANCOVA and was performed by the JASP
program. The results of this study showed that: (1) the SMART-Resilience
of psycho-education showed consistent effectiveness in increasing the
students resilience in one week and for weeks after these sessions were
terminated; and (2) the program was positive and high feasibility from
students and counsellor facilitator.
Keywords: resilience; strengths based CBT; school counselling; innovation in counselling.
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
41
INTRODUCTION
The study of the factors that have contributed to student success in academia and life over the
past few decades, has led to an understanding that in addition to preparing the students to be
academically smart and to succeed optimally, students need skills beyond the academic
substance learned in various subjects. During the previous decades, education in schools was
considered too busy taking care of the cognitive side of students. Until finally several theories
popped up and research results show the existence of other factors outside of cognitive or noncognitive factors that contribute more to success (Glewwe, Huang, & Park, 2011; Goleman,
2001; Quieng, Lim, & Lucas, 2015). The cognitive aspects require students to acquire new
knowledge, and the non-cognitive factors contribute significantly to student success in both
life and academia (Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki, Taylor, & Schellinger, 2011).
There are many of the various non-cognitive aspects that have been studied; resilience is one
of them, whose existence is important for all students and young people (Boon et al., 2017;
Campbell & Narayan, 2017; Castro-Olivo et al., 2013; Dray et al., 2011). Resilience basically
over all aspects of social psychosocial and emotional is needed by students to develop healthy
and have positive responses in dealing with various stressor situations (Suranata, Atmoko,
Hidayah, Rangka, & Ifdil, 2017). Students are resilient at a good level, capable of dealing with
all difficulties, stresses, even accustomed to turning difficulties into opportunities for success
(Luthar, Cicchetti, & Becker, 2015; Mlcek & Pulla, 2014; Suranata, Atmoko, & Hidayah, 2017;
Troy & Mauss, 2011). The concept of resilience that has developed over decades has provided
a way to understand the positive development of children under difficulties, and the factors and
processes that help children avoid dangerous, self-destructive or antisocial behaviour, mental
disorders, and threats to welfare of their physicality (Ungar, 2015).
The world of education and life that develops rapidly has an impact on changing situations and
environmental demands that put pressure on students. Research by Lewinsohn, Hops, Roberts,
Seeley, & Andrews (1993) show that there has been an increase in cases of depression about
ten times more than in the last decade. More than 20% of adolescents were experiencing
depression. The rise of news coverage in various media about teenagers and students showing
inappropriate and destructive behavior shows that this phenomenon also occurs in Indonesia.
This fact is inversely proportional to the prediction based on greater access to a more
established and developed environment, more food, transportation, school facilities, and
availability of entertainment and more support the mental health of students (Mongrain &
Anselmo-Matthews, 2012), these factors would help.
The highest prevalence for mental health problems tends to be among young people including
the student population. Mental health problems which include depression, anxiety, and other
emotional disorders can cause behavioural problems both at school and at home, increased risk
behaviors, such as tobacco use, alcohol and drug use, underachievement at school, even
criminal problems (Venkateswaran & Vincent, 2018). The low level of mental health shown
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
42
by students in schools is related to the low success of the school in developing resilience and
helping the psychological well-being of students (Sagone & Caroli, 2013). Dray et al (2011)
stated that one of the highest risks that could threaten students' academic success was stress
and depression. In carrying out academic tasks, students often face various difficulties that
cause psychological obstacles and stress. Cutuli et al (2013) found that students who failed to
overcome these difficulties and obstacles were students who were unable to actualise their
resilience. Jiboye, Salaudeen, Adejumo, & Aikomo (2019) found that psychological resilience
has correlation with the creativity and achievement of students in middle schools.
The school program has a important role to support students developing the potential to achieve
optimal self-development and independence in decision-making, overcome from stress and
depression and to achieve resilience and well being (Ranatunga & Pagliano, 2017; Suranata,
Atmoko, Hidayah, et al., 2017; Waters, 2011). The review of literature study by Moir, Yielder,
Dixon, & Hawken (2018) noted that the model of developing well being in schools requires
the support of all parties, from school administrators or principals, educators (teachers),
including students as well as parents and the community. The study by Moir and his team
suggested that collaboration between students and school staff was the key to the success of
the well-being development program. In line with these findings, Mulloy (2011) in his study
concluded that the fundamental thing that must happen in schools to develop resilience for
students is to reduce the impact of risk on their lives, and to embed students in a supportive
social network that increases their willingness to seek help from others, by growing students'
self-awareness and ability to regulate their emotions, and by instilling students with selfconfidence and intrinsic motivation to achieve academic and life success.
Several intervention models to improve mental health and wellbeing targeting adolescents and
adults in the resilience paradigm have been developed. These models implemented in various
countries in the world on a variety of interventions, excluded or integrated school curriculum
education (Leppin et al., 2014; Waters, 2011). These interventions were focused on developing
a variety of skills that could be used to avoid stress and depression to support students
developing resilience and well-being. Empirical research summarised in a meta-analysis study
found that resilience programs gained acceptance as part of the school curriculum to develop
psychological resilience and well-being (VicHealth, 2015). This program is also used in
overcoming problems with addiction to alcohol, tobacco, and cannabis (narcotics) among
students (Hodder et al., 2011).
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a model that dominates the resilience intervention in the
latest research (Lee, Cheung, & Kwong, 2012; VicHealth, 2015). CBT is the counselling and
psychotherapy that focuses on thoughts and experiences that emphasise changing negative
thoughts and maladaptive beliefs, developed by Beck (Suranata, Atmoko, & Hidayah, 2017).
There are several resilience programs that have been developed and implemented in schools
based on the CBT, such as the PRP: Penn Resilience Program (Brunwasser, Gillham, & Kim,
2009a; Jane E Gillham, Brunwasser, & Freres, 2008a), through stress and depression
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
43
intervention; the READY: Resilience And Activity For Every Day (Burton, Pakenham, &
Brown, 2010), based on Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), which is an empirically
based third generation of CBT; that is oriented to promote subjective well-being, and reduce
symptoms associated with depression and stress that obtain high effectiveness from a recent
study. The other model, FRIENDS (Barrett & Turner, 2001; Iizuka, Barrett, Gillies, Cook, &
Marinovic, 2015), is also a CBT-based resilience intervention, that focuses on overcoming
anxiety in promoting the psychological well-being of students. The adaptation of PENN
Resiliency, READY, and FRIENDS each shows consistent results about the feasibility of the
intervention program in helping students develop social and emotional abilities and overcome
emotional disorders and other psychological problems.
In contrast to the resilience interventions mentioned above, the SMART-Resilience Program
evaluated in this study is a psycho-educational program that integrates CBT reliability with
principles and procedures in strengths-based counselling. The development of SMARTResilience was inspired by the paradigm of positive psychology (Seligman, Ernst, Gillham,
Reivich, & Linkins, 2009), which calls for the paradigm of psychotherapy and counselling that
focuses on the problem, is no longer relevant, because the importance of seeing that each
individual has a positive side can be the basis and focus of intervention. The strengths based
counselling model (E. J. Smith, 2006; Elsie J Smith, 1973), which formulates how to help
individuals recognise and empower individual sources of strength and external sources of
social support to be the focus of assistance, rather than starting from the side of individual
problems. Contribution of thoughts about Positive based CBT (F. P. Bannink, 2014; Fredrike
P Bannink, 2013), inspired the integration of CBT with the paradigm of positive psychology.
Our previous research recommendations note that there are broad opportunities to combine
CBT with strengths based counseling for resilience interventions in school settings (Suranata,
Atmoko, & Hidayah, 2017). This pilot study aims to evaluate the effectiveness and feasibility
of the SMART-Resilience program for middle school students.
METHOD
The subject of the study
A total of 435 high school students from four different schools were invited to fill in the
resilience questionnaire. Using the matching sampling method, 72 students were selected to
participate in the experiment; every 36 students were students at SMA N 4 Denpasar as a
waiting list control group, and 36 students at SMA N 4 Singaraja as an experimental group.
Experimental Design
This pilot study conducted by the control trial experiment involved two groups, namely the
experimental group that received treatment and the waiting list control was the group that
waited for treatment after the experimental program was terminated. Involving a waiting list
control in this design is related to the ethics of experimental research as mentioned by Elliott
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
44
& Brown (2002). The experimental group participated in a counselling activity using the
SMART-Resilience model for 10 sessions and was facilitated by two trained counsellors.
While students in the waiting list control group during the experimental program did not receive
special treatment, they waited to attend the SMART-Resilience counselling program in the
following school semester. One week after ten SMART-Resilience sessions, i.e. in the eleventh
week, both the experimental group and the waiting list control group were invited back to fill
out the resilience questionnaire. The completion of the questionnaire for the follow-up test was
given again in the fifteenth week or 4 weeks after the SMART-Resilience session ended. The
recruitment and retention of participants in this study are shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. The experimental Procedure
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
45
Instrumentation
The assessment sessions were conducted in the classroom, in the week before, the week after
for posttest, and the follow up test conducted in four week after the session, by the independent
research assistants. Students are measured by 14 items of paper and pencil based on the
Indonesian version of the resilience scale that is adapted from the Resilience Youth
Development Module (Hanson & Kim, 2007). The property of the Indonesian version
resilience scale reported by Suranata, Atmoko, & Hidayah (2017b) did well in validation and
reliability for items and factors. There were five dimensions that were measured, namely: selfefficacy; self-awareness; problem solving skills; social skills; and goals. Respondents chose
one of four alternative answers provided for each item, (1) absolutely not true, (2) slightly
correct, (3) quite correct, and (4) very true.
The participants in the experimental group filled out a questionnaire about the acceptability
and feasibility of the SMART-Resiliency at the end of the session in six questionnaire items,
namely as many as three items evaluating the acceptability and the other three evaluating
feasibility. The statement was used to measure acceptability, namely; (1) all stages and
procedures of the program can be understood properly; (2) the stages and techniques of
counseling in the program are easily implemented; and (3) the techniques trained in the
program can be repeated without the guidance of the facilitator. While statements to measure
program feasibility include; (4) I am able to develop a better mindset after participating in the
program; (5) I am able to develop more comfortable feelings and emotions after participating
in the program; and (6) I am able to develop more effective behaviour after participating in the
program. This questionnaire was developed with a Likert’s Scale model with five response
choices; from strongly agree (5) to strongly disagree (1). At the end of the session, the
counsellor who facilitated the SMART-Resilience program was involved in an interview to
reflect on how the program responded to it, as well as the difficulties or constraints experienced
during the program.
Intervention Procedure
The Smart Resiliency developed by integrating CBT and strengths-based counseling : The
Smart-Resilience program is taken from five stages of implementation of this model, namely
(1) Source your strength, which trains students to identify and find the resources they have
(internal and external); (2) Manage yourself, which is a step to manage the resources of students
including thoughts, time and so on; (3) Actuating Potential, is a step to implement the resources
of students to achieve psychological well-being; (4) Remember The God, is steps to train
students to improve their spiritual side; and (5) Take your dream, is the last step to develop
optimism, hope, and motivation to achieve goals and aspiration.
The program contains 10 modules, and sessions including psycho-education, discussion,
experiential exercises, and structured learning and practice activities. Session topics include an
introduction to the SMART-Resilience model and the implementation of the technique. There
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
46
are seven techniques used in this model, which include: (1) drawing and stories, students paint
themselves by highlighting their self-strengths or potential from inside and from their
environmental social support; (2) the cognitive restructuring and positive affirmation, in which
students manage their beliefs and emotions, through recognising and discovering negative
thoughts and emotions, stopping negative thoughts and emotions, and replacing them with
more adaptive forms of thoughts and emotions (Pelusi, 2016); (3) self-management, in which
students manage themselves as a whole, from the time and facilities owned, including their
social support and finance. Self-management is implemented by students with a personal
logbook and they noted their activities, in use of time, infrastructure, social support and finance.
The logbook was discussed and evaluated weekly with a peers group and their school
counsellors; (4) the problem solving training is a technique intended to teach students to make
the right decision based on the best solution they have; (5) the social skills training is a
technique to improve the quality of problem solving related to social conflict. This technique
is implemented using the socio-drama method; (6) the miracles questions, and success chair
are techniques adapted from solution focused brief therapy (Dameron, 2016; Kim & Franklin,
2009); and (7) the mindfulness techniques was integrated in the tradition of cognitive behaviour
therapy (Cherkin et al., 2016).
Data Analysed Procedure
A descriptive analysis of each questionnaire item about acceptability and feasibility is
presented in a percentage, and the results of interviews with counsellor facilitators and students
are presented with narratives. The description and narrative focus on the level of acceptability
and feasibility of the SMART-Resiliency program based on the perceptions of students and the
program facilitator counsellors. Testing the effect of the SMART-Resilience Intervention was
done by comparing the results of the measurement of resilience variables in the experimental
group that followed the SMART-Resilience program with the waiting list control. The impact
was observed at two savings, or often referred to as repeated observations (Field, 2009), which
was one week after the intervention session in the experimental group and was complete four
weeks after the intervention. The test used the formulation of the General Linear Model (GLM)
2 x 2 repeated measures analysis of covariance. This RM-ANCOVA analysis used 2 groups
(the experimental group and the waiting list control group) and 2 observation times (posttest
and follow-up), while the pretest score was used as a control variable (covariate). The
Sphericity correction value, through Greenhouse-Geisser, was seen to assess the impact of the
treatment between time, posttest, and follow-up. As covariates, the effect of pretest interaction
with groups was also considered in considering the homogeneity of regression slopes. The
effective size of the partial eta squared was reported for each effect and each parameter estimate
(Chien, 2008). Comparisons of adjusted mean resilience in the two groups were corrected by
the Bonferroni test. All of the analysis was conducted using JASP V. 0.10. Analysis program
(Goss-Sampson, 2019), and the significance level used was 0.05 (Hair, Black, Babin, &
Anderson, 2010).
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
47
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The Acceptability and Feasibility
Of the 36 students assigned to take part in the SMART-Resilience program, only 31 students
took part in full. Two students only took part in six out of ten sessions because of health care,
and the other three only took part in seven activities because they took part in the competition
to become a school representative. The response of students who filled the acceptability and
feasibility questionnaires was very positive. As many as 29 out of 31 (93.50%) responded
strongly agree on the first item about acceptability, which meant that all stages and procedures
of the program could be understood very well. While the other two (6.50%) responded by
agreeing, which means they understood all the stages and procedures of the program quite well.
As many as 26 out of 31 (83.87%) students agreed strongly that the stages and counselling
techniques in the program were easy to implement, two people (6%) stated that they were quite
easy to implement, and three others (10%) stated that they were difficult to implement. In the
third item, 25 (81%) students stated that they could repeat the techniques that were trained quite
well without the facilitator, while six (19%) were unable to repeat themselves without the
guidance of the facilitator (counsellor). While three other items about feasibility also received
a positive response. In the fourth, fifth and sixth items in a row as many as 24 (77%) stated that
they strongly agreed that after joining the SMART-Resilience program, thoughts, feelings,
emotions and new behaviour were better and more effective. The other four (13%) stated that
they had been able to obtain more positive thoughts and feelings or emotions, and the other
three (10%) stated that they agreed after taking part in the program to get better thoughts. Two
counsellors who became facilitators of the activity also gave positive responses. They stated
that some technical procedures were quite complicated for high school students, such as
cognitive restructuring and reframing techniques, mindfulness techniques, also miracle
questions and success chairs that needed repeated explanation and simulation for each
participant. The facilitator also stated that ten sessions for 45 minutes for the whole program,
by implementing the seven techniques, was limited time. For better understanding for
participants, they suggested the need for more sessions and longer periods.
The effect of SMART-Resilience to Psychosocial Resilience
The descriptive statistical results of the measurement in an overall group in table 1 showed a
consistent increase in the experimental group, from measurement pretest, posttest and follow
up test. While in the waiting list control group, their average resilience moved lucratively,
increasing slightly from pretest to posttest, but returned to the follow-up test.
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
48
Table 1. Descriptive of Resilience before and after Intervention
Time Group M (Sd)
Pretest Experiment (n=31) 29.77(3.02)
Waiting list control (n=36) 29.08(1.71)
Posttest
Experiment (n=31) 45.77(3.06)
Waiting list control (n=36) 31.81(2.90)
Follow up
Experiment (n=31) 47.97(1.33)
Waiting list control (n=36) 29.83(1.83)
Table 2 showed the results of effect and interaction effect of every factor sources in this study.
The between subject comparison results showed the main effect of group was significant F
(1,64)=1363.01, p< .05, with very large effect size on Ƞ2partial= .96. The main effect of the
pretest was also significant but really low in effect size. These results indicated that there are
differences in resilience between groups of students who take the SMART-Resilience program
and the waiting list control group. The difference in initial resilience scores turned out to be
chaotic, but weak when seen from the size of the effect size. Nevertheless, the influence of the
pretest score was still taken into account, so it was very appropriate to involve it as covariates.
So that the bias of differences that occurred due to differences in pretest could be controlled
(Field, 2009).

Table 2 also showed that the main effects of time (posttest and follow up test) was significant
by F (1,64)=10.61, p<0.05, with effect sizes on Ƞ2partial =0.14 was medium. Interaction effect
of time and group was also significant by F (1,64)= 37.99,p<0.05, with large effect size by
Ƞ2partial = 0.37. The Interaction effect on time and pretest was also significant at F (1,64)=
10.52, p<0.05, with medium effect size Ƞ2partial=0.14. These results indicated that there were
differences in resilience between groups of students who took the SMART-Resilience program
and the waiting list control group. The difference in initial resilience scores turned out to be
chaotic, but weak when seen from the size of the effect size. Nevertheless, the influence of the
pretest score was still taken into account, so it was very appropriate to involve it as covariates.
So that the bias of differences that occurred due to differences in pretest could be controlled.
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
49
Table 2. Repeated Measure ANCOVA Results on Within and Between Subjects Effects
Sources Sum of
Squares df MNSQ F p η²p
Within Subjects Effects
Time 46.25 1 46.25 10.61 < .05 .14
Time*Group 165.66 1 165.66 37.99 < .05 .37
Time*Pretest 45.85 1 45.85 10.52 < .05 .14
Residual 279.06 64 4.36
Between Subjects Effect
Group 8255.98 1 8255.98 1363.01 < .05 .96
Pretest 32.46 1 32.46 5.36 < .05 .08
Residual 387.66 64 6.06
Note. Type III Sum of Squares.
In table 3, the post hoc comparisons between posttest and follow up test of resiliency
measurement was not significant by Bonferroni correction test, t = .10, >.05. But the
comparison between the experiment and waiting list control group showed the significant
difference, the mean deference = 15.91, on t = 36.92, p< .05, and effect size by Cohen’s d =
4.51, was strengths (Goss-Sampson, 2019). The results of this comparison showed that after
being controlled by the pretest, the experimental group that had participated in 10 SMARTResilience sessions had a higher resilience rate than the waiting list control. The comparison
of posttest and follow-up test was significant but with a very small effect size which showed
that from the measurement (posttest), i.e. a week after the session ended until four weeks after
the session ended (follow up test), the resilience of the experimental group students consistently
increased, but not the groups’ waiting list control. The analysis results in Tables 1, 2 and 3
proved that the SMART-Resilience intervention had the effect of increasing student resilience,
both immediately after the session had ended and some time after the session had ended.
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
50
Table 3. Post Hoc Comparisons on Time and Groups
Comparisons
sources
Mean
Difference SE t Cohens’s d P bonf
95% Confidence
interval for
Difference
lower (upper)
Posttest Vs.
Follow up test
.04 .46 .10 .01 > .05 -.88 (.96)
Experiment
Vs. Waiting
list control
15.91 .43 36.92 4.51 < .05 15.05 (16.77)
Before being implemented in a wider population, the effectiveness and feasibility of the
SMART-Resilience program of this model needed to be evaluated, so it could be seen whether
this technique was very important. By the points of this examination, the results confirmed that
the Smart-Resilience program fulfilled it as a feasible and effective program. The results of this
study proved that SMART-Resiliency showed the effectiveness and feasibility that was
adequate for secondary school students. Students consistently maintained high resilience even
after four weeks of school sessions under the guidance of a facilitator (counsellor). This
happened because most of them continued to implement the techniques that had been trained
during the session without the guidance of the facilitator. Most of the students who participated
in the session stated that they were able to understand and apply the stages and techniques of
SMART-Resilience, both during the session and after the session was ended. They could do
the techniques themselves without the guidance of the counsellor facilitator. In terms of
feasibility, most students had stated that they could obtain more positive thoughts, feelings, and
emotions that were more comfortable and healthier, and have more productive behavior.
Although some students, who were very small in number (around 10%), stated that there had
been a change in thinking and emotional patterns. These students are those who were less than
optimal in understanding and applying the stages and techniques of SMART-Resilience. This
was in line with the statement of two counsellors who facilitated the activity and also gave a
positive response, in line with the responses given by students. The facilitator provided some
meaningful input on improving the implementation of this intervention program further.
Among them, it was necessary to consider more time, as well as caution in providing
simulations individually for participants.
The results of this study are consistent with several past investigations that have shown the
adequacy of the psycho-education counselling model used to build strength among successful
students or young people. Among them are studies of PRP in several countries which have
generally been proven effective (Brunwasser & Gillham, 2016; Brunwasser, Gillham, & Kim,
2009b; Cardemil, Reivich, Beevers, Seligman, & James, 2007; Cutuli, Chaplin, Gillham,
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
51
Reivich, & Seligman, 2006; J E Gillham et al., 2007; Jane E. Gillham et al., 2012; Jane E
Gillham, Brunwasser, & Freres, 2008b; Peng et al., 2014; Sankaranarayanan & Cycil, 2014)
the efficacy of the READY Program (Burton et al., 2010), and efficacy of th Friends Program
(Cooley-Strickland, Griffin, Darney, Otte, & Ko, 2011; Essau, Conradt, Sasagawa, &
Ollendick, 2012; Matsumoto & Shimizu, 2016; Pereira, Marques, Russo, Barros, & Barrett,
2014; Ruttledge et al., 2016; Stallard, 2010). The series of studies have shown that socioemotional oriented PRP, Ready and Friends psycho-education programs with a focus on
handling stress, depression, and forms of emotional disturbances in students and youth as an
established model, have been tested longitudinally in several years and with populations in
some countries.
Instead of modifying established psycho-educational and socio-emotional learning programs,
the SMART-Resilience program focuses on understanding the improvement of positive
attributes of students' psychological conditions. Therefore the findings of this study can be used
as support to build appropriate counselling or therapeutic models in the psychology of cognitive
behavior that is strength-oriented. Compared with only managing psychological problems or
difficulties, but also developing positive aspects of students, for example, resilience, happiness,
and psychological well-being (F. P. Bannink, 2014; Padesky & Mooney, 2012; Seligman et al.,
2009). The SMART-Resilience Model provides answers to questions that have arisen from the
results of previous studies about comparing the effectiveness of cognitive-behavioral
counseling and strengths-based counseling by Suranata et al. (Suranata, Atmoko, & Hidayah,
2017b). Although both models are equally effective, the study recommends integration
between the two models as an eclectic model. Based on the recommendations of the research
results, to complete each of the two limitations, both models need to be completed. This can be
seen from the good acceptance of this SMART-Resilience model from participating students
and also school advisors who facilitate students to implement the program. Involving a wider
population with a more diverse distribution of characteristics and demographics needs further
testing of the SMART-Resilience model. Future studies need to pay attention to some
limitations of the results of this study, such as limited respondents, and with less diverse
characteristics from demographic dimensions and age levels. Testing students in various levels
of education, including in tertiary institutions, will be very useful in evaluating whether all the
techniques used in the SMART-Resilience model are feasible at all levels of students. It also
includes looking at gender factors that are very important in psychological interventions. It is
very important and will be more beneficial for the development of this model if further studies
are to test each procedure and technique separately, instead of evaluating only the whole
program.
CONCLUSION
The results of this study indicate that SMART-Resilience is an effective model and receives
positive acceptability and feasibility as a psycho-education model for students. The results of
testing the impact of this program showed an effect, with a high and consistent effect size after
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
52
the session was terminated and four weeks after the session was terminated. Students
participating in the program showed positive responses. Most of them stated that they were
able to understand and implement the procedures and stages of the SMART-Resilience module
during ten meeting sessions. Most of them also claimed to be able to independently practise
the techniques in this model outside of session meetings. By joining the program, students state
their ability to change less rational thinking into more positive ones and disturbed emotions
into a more comfortable and healthier form of emotions, and patterns of positive and productive
behaviour. The program facilitator counsellor also conveyed a response that was in line with
that. To implement this program in other wider populations, it is important to note some
findings related to obstacles in implementing the program experienced by the facilitator, which
are related to the need for more time and sessions, as well as giving wider opportunities for
each participant to simulate each technique being trained. Testing the impact of other factors
that can affect the results also needs to be investigated in further research.
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change. www.ijicc.net
Volume 5, Issue 5, Special Edition: ICET Malang City, 2019
53
REFERENCES
Bannink, F. P. (2014). Positive CBT: From reducing distress to building success. Journal of
Contemporary Psychotherapy, 44(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10879-013-9239-7
Bannink, Fredrike P. (2013). Are you ready for positive cognitive behavioral therapy? Pozitif
bilişsel davranışçı terapiye hazır mısınız? The Journal of Happiness & Well-Being, 1(2),
65–73. Retrieved from
http://www.journalofhappiness.net/frontend/articles/pdf/v01i02/A
