ABSTRACT
Objectives: The present review aimed to assess the quality, content and
evidence of efficacy of universally-delivered (to all pupils) school-based mental
health interventions aimed to promote wellbeing and resilience provided within
the UK.
Method: A systematic review of published literature was conducted.
Relevant electronic databases were searched, supplemented by informal search
strategies. Studies were appraised using a quality checklist appropriate for nonrandomised studies. 12 studies were included for review (5 primary school
based, 7 secondary school based).
Results: Effectiveness of school-based universal interventions was found
to be neutral or small with more positive effects found for poorer quality studies
and those based in Primary schools (pupils aged 9-12 years old). Studies varied
widely in their use of measures and study design. Intervention approaches
included CBT, mental health education, mindfulness and behavioural
approaches. Methodological issues such as small sample size, varying course
fidelity and lack of randomisation reduced overall study quality rendering
tentative interpretation of effects.
Conclusions: The current evidence suggests there are neutral to small
effects of universal, school-based interventions in the UK that aim to promote
emotional or mental wellbeing or prevention mental health difficulties. Robust,
long-term methodologies need to be pursued ensuring adequate recording of
fidelity, the use of validated measures sensitive to mechanisms of change,
reporting of those lost to follow up and any adverse effects. Further research
collaborations are required across the UK in order to facilitate coherence in the
literature and demonstrate any long-term benefits for pupils or on the wider
educational or health system.
Keywords: Review, school-based, resilience, wellbeing, intervention.
Page 6 of 108
INTRODUCTION
The mental and emotional wellbeing of children and young people has
received increased attention worldwide. It has been reported that the
prevalence of mental health problems ranges from 10-20% (Kieling et al., 2011)
and that by the age of 18 up to 20% of young people will have experienced an
emotional disorder (Costello et al., 2003). Mental health conditions such as
anxiety and depression often persist into adulthood (Kendall et al., 2004) and
have been associated with a range of negative outcomes including lower
academic achievement, higher likelihood of health risk behaviour, self-harm and
suicide (Collins & Dozois, 2008; Patel et al., 2007). However, provision of
services for those in need can be as low as 20% (WHO, 2005). Such access issues
to specialist services like CAMHS has meant that school based interventions have
been increasingly explored, due to their far reach (Masia Warner et al., 2006)
and existing infrastructure to support child development (Domitrovich et al.,
2010), while noting that schools need support to use the evidence base when
applying such interventions (Vostanis et al., 2013).
Several systematic reviews and meta-analyses have been conducted to
review the effectiveness of school-based, mental health interventions at both
the universal (delivered to all pupils irrespective of perceived need), and
targeted (delivered to vulnerable or ‘high risk’ individuals only) levels. Durlak et
al. (2011) reviewed 213 studies and found that school based programs aiming to
enhance social and emotional learning yielded positive effects on social
emotional skills, self-concept, positive social behaviours conduct problems and
emotional distress (E.S. = 0.22 - 0.57) and that these sustained after 6 months.
Wells et al. (2003) reviewed universal programs and found improvements in selfconcept and problem solving. Further, that more positive outcomes were
obtained for programs adopting a whole school approach, that lasted more than
one year, and aimed to promote mental health rather than prevent mental
illness. These findings were echoed in Weare & Nind’s (2011) review of 53
mental health interventions, adding that a balance of both universal and
targeted approaches was optimal, and that interventions were only effective if
accurately implemented.
Page 7 of 108
Neil and Christensen (2009) found that CBT formed the basis of the
majority of anxiety prevention programs (78%) and over 75% of trials reported a
significant reduction in anxiety. CBT-based interventions were also tentatively
endorsed in Mychailyszyn et al.’s (2012) meta-analysis of 63 studies which found
that CBT was mildly effective in reducing depression (E.S .= 0.29) and
moderately effective (E.S. = 0.50) for reducing anxiety symptoms.
Reviews of studies evaluating the prevention of specific mental health
conditions have found mixed results. Merry et al. (2011) in their meta-analysis of
53 studies evaluating prevention of depression programmes found that while
there was evidence of immediate post-intervention effects, these did not sustain
over time (24-36 months). Further, Correiri et al. (2013) reviewed 28 studies
evaluating anxiety and depression programmes and found that while the
majority were effective for depression (65%) and anxiety (73%), the effect sizes
were small (0.12 - 0.29).
Spence & Short (2007) reviewed 14 universal school-based prevention of
depression studies and found few positive effects, concluding that universal
prevention interventions were not efficacious. This was later endorsed by Calear
& Christensen (2010) who concluded that targeted programs were most effective
(ES = 0.21 to 1.40), and in Kavanagh et al. (2009)’s meta-analysis which found
that while school-based CBT programmes led to a short-term reduction in
depression symptoms, interventions were most effective for those in the clinical
range.
Overall therefore, the literature has indicated mixed results regarding
efficacy of school-based universal interventions. However, it has been
consistent in highlighting methodological issues within the existing research
base. In particular, that there is a lack of active intervention controls (Stallard,
2013), studies’ operationalisation and measurements of ‘resilience’ lack
Page 8 of 108
homogeneity (Reavley et al., 2015), that weak program fidelity and treatment
dosage impacts outcomes (Durlak et al., 2011) and that there is insufficient use
of validated, standardised measures and long-term follow up (Sancassiani et al.,
2015).
Furthermore, it is noteable that all of the above studies have occurred
across a wide range of countries, with most reviewed interventions based in
Australia, the US or Canada. This trend was also noted in a NICE funded review
(2008) of targeted and universal school-based interventions where it was
observed that while the findings from international based research are valuable,
the generalisability to the UK educational system is somewhat questionable,
giving rise to a need for reviews specifically within the UK context.
Cheney et al. (2014) subsequently focused on the UK in their review of
targeted school-based interventions. They concluded that nurture groups
demonstrate an immediate positive impact on the social and emotional
wellbeing on vulnerable young people, however, that results from longer term
follow-up studies are less clear.
The need to carry out a review of universal school-based interventions
specifically within the UK context therefore remains. This is especially pertinent
in light of the increasing emphasis from national government on developing
CAMHS services within the UK, and the impetus on health and education services
to work together in order to improve wellbeing outcomes for children and young
people (Department of Education, 2016; Education Scotland, no publication
date; CYMRU, 2010).
Page 9 of 108
Review aims
The present review aims to fill this gap in the literature by focusing on
universally-delivered, school-based mental health interventions provided within
the UK only. The following questions will be explored:
1. How effective are universal school based interventions in the UK that
promote mental health, emotional wellbeing, or psychological resilience
and what tools are being used to measure effectiveness?
2. What methodologies are being applied in UK schools when trialling
interventions and what is the quality of these studies?
3. What are the intervention characteristics e.g. delivery, content, target
audience?
4. What are the identified barriers in delivering and evaluating universal
school based interventions?
Page 10 of 108
Search Strategy
Electronic databases were searched for relevant published research on
14th April 2016: EMBASE, CINAHL, MEDLINE, PsycINFO, PsycArticles, ASSIA and
Psychological and Behavioural Sciences. Selected journals relevant to the area
were also hand-searched (British Journal of Educational Psychology; British
Journal of School Nursing). Previous reviews and relevant papers were reviewed
and following consultation with University librarians, the following keyword
search terms were used linked with the Boolean operators ‘AND’ and ‘OR’ (*
indicates truncation of words):
Mental Health OR Early Intervention OR Anxi* OR depress * OR resilien* OR
emotion* OR stress* OR psycho* OR wellbeing
AND
Adolescent OR Adolescen* OR child* OR teen* OR youth OR young pe* OR pupil*
OR student* OR learner* OR scho*
AND
School based OR School based mental health OR School based intervention OR
interven* OR effect* OR program* OR initiative OR strateg* OR evaluat*
AND
United Kingdom OR UK OR Sco* OR eng* OR northern ir* OR wales OR wel* OR
brit* OR kingdom
Study design criteria was wide to allow for the diverse range of
methodologies used to overcome challenges in school-based research. Search
terms were, therefore, chosen primarily to promote sensitivity to the subject
area. A limit date was set from 2000 to April 2016. The early date limit was
selected as this area has been promoted by UK governmental policy largely
within the last decade. Further, detailed appraisal of the previous systematic
reviews in this area found few, if any, discovered studies prior to this date.
Page 11 of 108
Study selection
The inclusion criteria were as follows:
• The intervention was based in a mainstream school environment;
• Pupils were the recipients of the interventions;
• The study adopted a pre-post design;
• The intervention aimed to target mental health and/or emotional
wellbeing;
• The study used a validated measure to quantitatively evaluate emotional
or mental wellbeing outcomes and reported those outcomes;
• The study was published between 2000 and April 2016 in a peer reviewed
journal.
Exclusion criteria included:
• The study aims or methodology did not fit the inclusion criteria.
• Any studies using a non-validated outcome measure as their primary
outcome e.g. Likert scales.
• Any studies using a purely qualitative methodology.
Details of included and excluded studies (see Figure 1, below.)
Duplicate papers were excluded. Titles were screened to identify only
those that clearly met inclusion criteria. Abstracts were assessed independently
by the author and a co-rater (Professor Chris Williams). Raters met to compare
included papers. Where eligibility was unclear based on the abstract, full
articles were retrieved and assessed jointly by raters. Reference lists of included
papers were searched as well as previous reviews on related topics. Articles
citing included articles were also reviewed and one paper was sourced via this
method. Authors of protocol papers were contacted leading to an additional
paper being sourced. Experts in the field in Scotland, England, Northern Ireland
and Wales were contacted regarding any other studies. However, none were
eligible for inclusion. Twelve papers were included in the final review.
Page 12 of 108
Figure 1: PRISMA diagram of systematic search process.
Quality rating of studies:
The Downs and Black (1998) checklist was used to assess quality. This
checklist assesses internal and external validity, selection bias and study power
over 27 items. This checklist was used due to its utility in assessing studies
relating to public health and its applicability to assess quality in both
randomised and non-randomised studies. Reliability and validity assessment has
Records identified through database
searching:
ASSIA: 121
CINAHL: 562
EMBASE: 436
MEDLINE: 281
Psycarticles: 323
Psychology and behavioural sciences: 778
Psycinfo: 238
Total: 2739
Screening Included Eligibility Identification
Additional records identified
through other sources:
• Hand searching key journals: 0
• Reference lists and citations: 1
• Contacting authors: 1
Records screened after duplicates (n=845)
removed: 1896
Excluded:
• Not an evaluation related to
mental or emotional
wellbeing: 1580
• School based evaluation
however not based in the
UK: 230
Full-text articles assessed
for eligibility: 17
Excluded:
• Protocol paper: 2
• Awaiting publication: 1
• Editorial articles: 2
12 studies included for review
(5 x primary-school based;
7 x secondary-school based)
86 abstracts screened for eligibility
Excluded:
Targeted intervention: 69
Page 13 of 108
found the Quality Index to have high internal consistency, good test-retest
(r = 0.88) and inter-rater (r = 0.75) reliability and good face and criterion validity
(0.90) (Downs & Black, 1998).
A sample of papers were assessed by an independent researcher. Any
rating discrepancies were discussed and a shared decision reached. A decision
was taken not to exclude any studies found to be of poor quality as the aim of
this current review was to critique universal school based interventions whilst
acknowledging that the real world implementation of such evaluations can be
challenging and, as a result, may reasonably impact study quality.
Data extraction
Due to the heterogeneity of the studies, meta-analysis was not
appropriate. A narrative synthesis will be applied to explain the findings of this
review in line with current guidance (Popay et al., 2006). Information gathered
from the studies included: study aim, intervention (model, duration, delivery),
sample characteristics, study procedures, outcomes and measures, and results.
Issues relating to the implementation, as well as effectiveness, of interventions
were also noted from those studies commenting on such barriers.
Page 14 of 108
RESULTS
Overview of interventions
Of the twelve studies sourced, five took place in primary schools (Attwood
et al., 2012; Berry et al., 2016; Collins et al., 2013; Stallard et al., 2007;
Stallard et al., 2014) and seven took place in secondary schools (Boniwell et al.,
2016; Challen et al., 2014; Chisholm et al., 2016; Kuyken et al., 2013; Rice et
al., 2015; Naylor et al., 2009 and Stallard et al., 2013). An overview of study
interventions based in Primary and Secondary schools can be found in Table 1.
Primary school studies:
The five studies within primary school settings evaluated interventions
based on computerised CBT (Attwood et al., 2012); a teacher led intervention
embedded within the curriculum (e.g. PATHS – ‘Promoting Alternative Thinking
Strategies’; Berry et al., 2016); manualised anxiety interventions (e.g. a locally
developed anxiety intervention, or the Australian developed ‘FRIENDS’
programme) delivered by both school staff (teachers and nurses) and external
health staff (e.g. psychologists) (Collins et al., 2013; Stallard et al., 2007;
Stallard et al., 2014).
Secondary school studies:
Three of the secondary school based studies trialled interventions based
on Cognitive Behavioural Therapy principles e.g. UK Resilience programme
(UKRP), Resourceful Adolescent Programme (RAP-UK) (Rice et al., 2015; Challen
et al., 2014; Stallard et al. 2013) delivered by school staff (Challen et al., 2014),
educational psychologists (Rice et al., 2015) and external facilitators (Stallard et
al., 2013). Interventions were also said to include principles of Interpersonal
Therapy (RAP-UK – Stallard et al., 2013) and behavioural approaches (‘TRY’ –
Rice et al., 2015).
One study trialled an intervention based on Positive Psychology (Boniwell
et al., 2016), two studies trialled a mindfulness-based intervention (Kuyken et
al., 2013; Rice et al., 2015) and two trialled locally developed mental health
education sessions delivered to all pupils (Chisholm et al., 2016; Naylor et al.,
2009). These interventions were led by trained school teachers (Boniwell et al.,
2016; Kuyken et al., 2013, Naylor et al., 2009), and trained volunteers (Chisholm
Page 15 of 108
et al., 2016). All delivered the intervention during Personal Health and Social
Education (PHSE) classes.
Methodological quality
The quality of studies ranged from ‘poor’ (34% - Attwood et al., 2012;
37.5% - Boniwell et al., 2016) to ‘excellent’ (75% - Chisholm et al., 2016; Stallard
et al., 2014; 78.1% - Challen et al., 2014; 81.3% - Stallard et al., 2013).
Six studies used a randomised controlled pre-post design (Attwood et al.,
2012; Berry et al., 2016; Chisholm et al., 2016; Collins et al., 2013; Stallard et
al., 2013; Stallard et al., 2014). The remaining were non-randomised pre-post
designs and only one did not have a control group (Stallard et al., 2007). Some
studies were particularly weak on their description of sample characteristics and
representation of the population (Attwood et al., 2012; Boniwell et al., 2016),
reporting of those lost to follow up and accounting for those in the analysis
(Collins et al., 2013; Boniwell et al., 2016), and exploring of adverse events of
which only one study provided information (Stallard et al., 2013). Only six
studies provided a power calculation (Challen et al., 2014; Chisholm et al., 2016;
Naylor et al., 2009; Stallard et al., 2013; Berry et al., 2016; Stallard et al.,
2014), most of which had samples sufficiently powered to determine an effect
(except Chisholm et al., 2016). The remaining studies did not provide such
information.
Of the eleven studies employing controls, six used controls from the same
school in which the intervention was taking place (Challen et al., 2014, Chisholm
et al., 2016, Rice et al., 2015; Collins et al., 2013, Stallard et al., 2014). All
other studies recruited controls from different schools.
Sample sizes ranged from 13 (Attwood et al., 2012) to 5075 (Berry et al.,
2016). The age of participants ranged from 4 (Berry et al., 2016) to 16 years old
(Stallard et al., 2013; Kuyken et al., 2013) with the majority of studies targeting
the early adolescent age range (9-12 years old) at the end of Primary school or
at the beginning of Junior / Secondary school (Attwood et al., 2012; Boniwell et
al., 2016; Challen et al., 2014; Chisholm et al., 2016; Collins et al., 2013;
Stallard et al., 2014).
Page 16 of 108
Table 1. Overview of interventions based in Primary and Secondary schools.
PRIMARY SCHOOLS
Study
(Location)
Sample Study aim /
hypothesis
Intervention – Theoretical
model and Content
Intervention –
Setting,
Structure &
Delivery
Attwood et
al., 2012
(Bristol,
England)
10-12
year old
boys
from
two coeducatio
nal
schools.
(n=13)
A proof of
concept study
to explore
the viability
and possible
benefits of a
cCBT
programme.
‘Think, Feel, Do’ – Based on CBT
principles with a psychoeducation
component, cartoon characters
guide users through various
activities including: emotional
recognition; linking thoughts,
feelings and behaviours;
identifying and challenging
negative thoughts; and problem
solving. Involves quizzes,
practical exercises, videos, music
and animation.
Six x 45min
sessions delivered
via an interactive
multimedia CDROM.
Took place within
the school,
facilitated by the
researcher.
Berry et
al., 2016
(Birmingham,
England)
4-6 year
old
pupils
(n=5074;
56 x
schools)
Test the
effectiveness
and costeffectiveness
of the
intervention
to reduce
children’s
level of
behavioural
and
emotional
difficulty.
‘PATHS’ (Promoting alternative
thinking strategies) – aims to
improve skills in five areas: selfawareness, managing feelings,
motivation, empathy and social
skills. Lessons are
developmentally sequenced and
focus on techniques for selfcontrol; emotional and
interpersonal understanding
steps for solving interpersonal
problems; positive self-esteem
and improved peer r’ships.
44 x lessons in
Year 1; 47 x
lessons in Year 2.
Delivered by
trained teachers
within classroom.
Manual provides
teacher scripts,
pictures, activity
sheets, photos,
posters, & home
activities.
Collins et
al., 2013
(South
Lanarkshire,
Scotland)
9-10
year old
pupils
(n=317;
9
schools;
18
classes).
To explore if
anxiety &
coping
showed
improvement
postintervention,
and test
effects of
delivery.
‘Lessons for living: Think Well,
Do Well’. CBT based intervention
to develop coping skills. A series
of skills practice using
interactive teaching methods.
Children are guided to recognise
emotional symptoms, reduce
avoidant coping strategies, and
focus on proactive problems
solving and support-seeking.
Ten x lessons
delivered by a
psychologist
(n=103) & teacher
(n=79) during
PSE. Teachers
provided with
intervention
manual following
one-day training.
Stallard et
al., 2007
(Bath &
N.E.
Somerset,
England)
9-10
year old
pupils
(n=106;
3
schools;
4
classes).
To evaluate
an
Australianoriginated
intervention
in the UK;
test delivery
by school
nurses.
‘FRIENDS – Feelings, Relax, I can
do it, Explore solutions, Now
reward, Don’t forget practice,
Smile’. Based on CBT principles it
teaches children practice skills to
identify their anxious feelings
and learn to relax; to identify
unhelpful thoughts and replace
them with helpful thoughts; to
face and overcome problems and
challenges.
Ten x sessions
delivered by
school nurses who
attended 2-day
training.
Lessons comprise
group work,
workbooks, role
play and games.
Parents invited to
pre-intervention
session.
Page 17 of 108
Stallard et
al., 2014
(Bath, N.E.
Somerset,
Swindon,
Wiltshire,
England)
9-10
year old
pupils
(n=1448;
45 x
schools)
To assess the
effectiveness
of FRIENDS
delivered by
both health
and school
professionals
on anxiety
prevention.
As above (Stallard et al., 2007) Nine x 60 min
lessons delivered
to whole classes.
Health-led group:
two trained
facilitators;
Teacher-led
group: led by
class teacher. All
attended 2-day
training.
SECONDARY SCHOOLS
Study
(Location)
Sample Study aim /
hypothesis
Intervention – Theoretical
model and Content
Intervention –
Setting,
Structure &
Delivery
Boniwell et
al., 2016
(S.E.
London,
England)
11-12
year old
pupils
(n=296;
2 x
Haberdashers’
Aske’s
Fed. of
Schools)
To test the
efficacy of a
new school
programme for
the promotion
of happiness and
wellbeing skills.
‘Personal Wellbeing Lesson
Curriculum’ – Covers the
‘scientific basis of happiness’
focusing specifically on two
core aspects – positive
emotions / experiences and
positive relationships. Based
on theoretical constructs from
wellbeing research and positive
psychology e.g. ‘three good
things’, forgiveness letter,
gratitude visit.
Eighteen biweekly 50 min
scripted lessons
delivered to 8
classes by 4
teachers who
attended 5-day
training.
Provided with
lesson plans,
PowerPoints and
handouts.
Challen et
al., 2014
(Greater
London,
N.W.
England &
N.E.
England)
11-12
year old
pupils
(n=
2844; 16
x
schools;
3 x L.As)
To evaluate a
UK version of
Penn Resiliency
Program (PRP).
Hypothesised
high completion
rates &
reduction of
depression
symptoms.
‘UK Resiliency Program’ - Aims
to build resilience and promote
realistic thinking and adaptive
coping, based on Ellis’s
‘Activating event-belief
Consequences model’. Teaches
cognitive behavioural and
social problem solving skills.,
encouraging accurate appraisal
of situations, and
assertiveness, negotiation and
relaxation skills.
An 18-hour
program
delivered within
the timetable at
the teacher’s
discretion.
Delivered by
school staff who
attended 10-day
training in the
US.
Chisholm
et al.,2016
(Birmingham,
England)
12-13
year old
pupils
(n=769;
6 x
schools).
To test whether
contact with an
individual with
MH diagnosis
plus education
is more
effective in
reducing stigma,
improving MH
literacy and
promoting
wellbeing than
education alone.
‘Schoolspace’ – a 10-module
MH intervention designed by
study researchers covering
topics such as stress,
depression, psychosis,
different ways of thinking and
a drama workshop. The
‘contact’ group had an
individual facilitating who was
a MH service user and had a
diagnosis (e.g. psychosis, BPD)
– this was revealed halfway
through the day.
A one-day
intervention
within the school
led by NHS staff,
trained
volunteers and
MH service users.
Page 18 of 108
Kuyken et
al., 2013
(England)
12-16
year old
pupils
(n= 522;
12 x
schools).
To investigate
the
acceptability of
a mindfulness
programme for
teachers and
students; test
efficacy of
programme on
MH and
wellbeing.
‘Mindfulness in Schools
Program’ (MiSP) – involved
learning to direct attention to
immediate experience with
open-minded curiosity and
acceptance. Skills are learned
through practices and everyday
application. Mindfulness then
used to work with mental
states and everyday stressors
to cultivate wellbeing and
promote mental health.
Nine x weekly
scripted lessons
delivered as part
of the
curriculum, or at
lunchtime by 7
teachers trained
and approved to
deliver the MiSP
curriculum.
Rice et al.,
2015
(S.E.
England)
13-14
year old
pupils
(n=256;
3 x
schools).
To compare
three types of
intervention
which may
prevent
adolescent
depression and
explore
cognitive
mechanisms
involved with
each.
‘TRY’ (Thinking about Reward
in Young People) - aimed to
enhance reward processing
through actively selecting
activities to lift mood.
CBT – aimed to change negative
thinking patterns by
encouraging evaluation of
thoughts.
‘MBCT’ (Mindfulness Based
Cognitive Therapy) – aimed to
promote awareness and
acceptance of thoughts and to
develop regulation of attention
through guided meditation.
Psychoeducation regarding
depression was provided to all
groups.
Eight x weekly
manualised
sessions of each
intervention
delivered within
50 minute PHSE
lessons by
Educational
Psychologists who
attended regular
supervision.
Naylor et
al. 2009
(Greater
London,
England)
14-15
year old
pupils
(n=416;
2 x
schools).
To explore
whether
teaching
adolescents
about mental
health would
result in gains in
knowledge and
empathy.
Mental health lessons - Topics
included: stress, learning
disability, depression, suicide /
self-harm, eating disorders,
and bullying using methods
such as discussion, role playing
and internet searching.
Six x 50 min
weekly lessons
delivered by 7
group tutors
from pastoral
care who
attended a 1-day
training from
researchers.
Stallard et
al., 2013.
(Bath, N.E.
Somerset,
Bristol,
Wiltshire,
Nottinghamshire,
England)
12-16
year old
pupils
(n=5030;
8 x
schools,
28 x
year
groups).
To assess effects
of classroom
based CBT on
symptoms of
depression and
in relation to
other aspects of
psychological
wellbeing and
specific
demographic
sub-groups.
‘RAP-UK: Resourceful
Adolescent Programme’ –A
depression prevention
programme based on CBT and
interpersonal therapy
principles adapted to fit the
UK curriculum. Key elements
include: personal strengths,
helpful thinking, keeping calm,
problem solving, support
networks and keeping the
peace. Students complete
workbooks as they progress.
Nine x 50-60 min
manualised
lessons delivered
within the PSHE
curriculum by
two trained
facilitators
external to the
school.
Two booster
sessions offered
to schools at 6
month follow up.
Page 19 of 108
EFFECTIVENESS OF INTERVENTIONS
An overview of study characteristics and outcomes can be found in Tables 2 and
3.
Data collection and measurement
Studies varied widely in their use of measures. Measures used to rate
depressive symptoms included the Children’s Depression Inventory (CDI) (Challen
et al., 2014), the Short Mood and Feelings Questionnaire (SMFQ) (Stallard et al.,
2013; Rice et al., 2015) and the Center for Epidemiological Studies – Depression
Scale (CES-D) (Kuyken et al., 2013). Measures used to rate anxiety included the
Revised Children’s Anxiety and Depression Scale (RCADS) (Stallard et al., 2013,
Stallard et al., 2014), Revised Children’s Manifest Anxiety Scale (RCMAS)
(Challen et al., 2014), Penn State Worry questionnaire (Stallard et al., 2013) and
the Spence anxiety scale (Collins et al., 2013; Attwood et al., 2012, Stallard et
al., 2007). Measures used to capture different methods of coping related to
symptoms of anxiety or depression included: Children’s Automatic Thoughts
Scale (CATS) (Stallard et al., 2013), Coping Strategy Indicator (CSI) (Collins et
al., 2013), Sentence Completion for Events in the Past Test (SCEPT) (Rice et al.,
2015), and Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) (Kuyken et al., 2013). Two studies used
measures related specifically to wellbeing or resilience: Warwick-Edinburgh
Mental Wellbeing Scale (WEMWBS) (Kuyken et al., 2013) and the Resilience Scale
(Chisholm et al., 2016) although others used measures related to self-esteem
(Stallard et al., 2013, Stallard et al., 2007, Stallard et al., 2014) and life
satisfaction (Boniwell et al., 2016). The Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire
(SDQ) was the most commonly used measure said to rate behavioural, emotional
difficulties and overall functioning and either the child, parent or teacher
version was used in six of the twelve studies (Attwood et al., 2012, Berry et al.,
2016, Stallard et al., 2007, Challen et al., 2014, Naylor et al., 2009, Chisholm et
al., 2016). Studies varied according to the length of follow up ranging from 4
weeks (Chisholm et al., 2016), to 2 years (Stallard et al., 2013). Four of the
twelve studies sought to obtain qualitative, as well as quantitative data
(Attwood et al., 2012; Boniwell et al., 2016; Chisholm et al., 2016, Stallard et
al., 2013). However, it is beyond the scope of this paper to comment on
qualitative findings.
Page 20 of 108
Due to the heterogeneity of studies, the effectiveness of each
intervention approach will be discussed in turn. Overall, results suggested a
trend whereby higher quality studies reported less positive effects.
Studies trialling bespoke mental health education programmes (n=3; Naylor et
al., 2009; Chisholm et al., 2016; Boniwell et al., 2016 – all in secondary schools).
Two studies found small (d=0.11-0.22) but significant improvements in
total and subscale SDQ scores for those that received mental health education.
However, it is noteworthy that Chisholm et al. (2016) did not employ a nonintervention condition. Boniwell et al. (2016) trialled a bespoke intervention
based on Positive Psychology principles and found a decrease in outcomes of life
satisfaction and an increase in negative affect for both groups. However, this
was less so for the intervention group (d=-0.24 compared to d=-0.79) which was
interpreted as the intervention having a ‘buffering effect’ at a time of stress for
the pupils.
Studies trialling CBT-based interventions (n= 7; Stallard et al., 2007; Stallard
et al. 2013; Stallard et al., 2014; Collins et al., 2013; Rice et al., 2015; Challen
et al., 2014; Attwood et al., 2012; Berry et al., 2016). These are described by
setting (Primary and then Secondary).
Primary schools
All primary-school based studies trialled interventions pertaining to
altering thinking styles akin to CBT principles. Four studies, three of which
employed a control arm, reported statistically positive outcomes on anxietyrelated measures following interventions including FRIENDS (Stallard et al.,
2007; Stallard et al., 2014), ‘Think Feel Do’ (Attwood et al., 2012) and locally
developed CBT programmes (Collins et al., 2013) with larger effects for those in
‘high risk’ groups (d=-1.26; Stallard et al., 2007 – no control arm). Mixed results
were found in relation to delivery, with stronger effects found in interventions
led by health professionals (d=0.2) versus school staff (d=0.02) (Stallard et al.,
2014) and no difference between psychologist or teacher-led interventions
(Collins et al., 2013). Methodological issues such as small sample size and
significant group differences at baseline (n=13; Attwood et al., 2012), failure to
include those lost to follow-up in analysis (Collins et al., 2013), lack of controls
Page 21 of 108
(Stallard et al., 2007), and small effect sizes for universal samples (d=0.01 - 0.2)
(Stallard et al., 2014) should be noted when taking inference from those results.
A sufficiently powered, good quality study evaluating the use of PATHS within
the curriculum found few, small significant results (d = 0.06 – 0.14; teacherrated intervention measure) at 12-month follow up, and no effects on any
measure at 24-month follow up (Berry et al., 2016).
Secondary schools
Fewer significant outcomes were found in trials based within secondary
school populations. Small (d=0.093), but short-lived positive outcomes were
found on the CDI for those in the UKRP intervention (Challen et al., 2014). Mixed
results were found for those in the UK-RAP intervention, with results indicating
some beneficial and also potentially negative outcomes (Stallard et al., 2013)
although all with small effect sizes. Both were high quality, longitudinal, wellpowered studies employing robust methodologies. Further, no effects were
found in the CBT group when compared with as-usual controls or other
treatments in a smaller study looking at mechanisms of change (Rice et al.,
2015). In the same study, a behavioural intervention (TRY) was found to have
positive effects on reward-seeking behaviour and SMFQ measure (d=-0.8) when
compared with other treatments; however this finding did not transpire when
compared with PHSE-as-usual controls.
Studies using mindfulness based interventions (n=2; Kuyken et al., 2013; Rice
et al., 2015 – both in secondary schools).
Positive outcomes were found in a feasibility study evaluating a
mindfulness-based intervention (Kuyken et al., 2013) which yielded statistically
significant, modest effects on both depression (CES-D: d=-0.24) and wellbeing
(WEMWBS: d=0.15) measures. Due to small sample sizes this study was likely to
be underpowered; however, outcomes were sustained at 3 month follow up and
were associated with greater mindfulness practice. No significant outcomes were
found in a smaller study trialling MBCT on measures of mood (SMFQ) or rewardseeking (Rice et al., 2015).
Page 22 of 108
Table 2. Design and outcome characteristics of primary-school based studies.
Study (%
quality rating)
Study Design Measures Follow-up Effects / Outcomes
Attwood et
al., 2012
(34%)
Randomised pre-post intervention
evaluation using opportunistic
sample. No blinding or randomisation
procedure reported. ‘cCBT’ (n=6) x
control group (n=7).
• Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale -
Parent & Child version.
• SDQ – Parent version.
• Focus groups (n=8)
Baseline;
6-weeks post
intervention.
Significant reduction in SCAS-C ‘social’ (d=0.49*)
and ‘general anxiety’ (d=0.48*) subscales (NB:
Intervention group significantly higher on SCAS
at baseline).
No effects on parent rated measures.
Berry et
al., 2016
(68.8%)
Randomised controlled trial; web
randomisation system.
29 schools ‘PATHS’ intervention x 27
schools WL Control.¹
• SDQ – teacher version.
• PATHS teacher rating scale (PTRS).
• Teacher Pupil Observation Tool
(T-POT).
Baseline;
12 mo postintervention;
24 mo post
intervention.
No differences on SDQ at 12-month F-up. Some
significant results on subscales of PTRS at 12 mo
f-up (Social competence: d=0.09*; Aggression:
d=0.14*; Inattention: d=-0.06*; Peer relations: -
0.10*). Not maintained at 24 month follow up.
Collins et
al., 2013
(46.9%)
Randomised 3 x 3 mixed design. No
randomisation procedure reported.
Psychologist led anxiety intervention
(n=103) x Teacher led anxiety
intervention (n=79) x Controls
(n=135).
• Coping Strategy Indicator (CSI).
• SCAS -Child version administered by
teachers.
Baseline;
postintervention;
(within 3
weeks of end);
6 mo follow
up.
Improvement in psychologist-led and teacher-led
groups on SCAS-C (d=0.41*; d=0.31*) & CSI
‘Avoidance’ (d=0.31*; d=0.31*) and ‘problem
solving’ (d=-0.66*; d=0.52*) subscales. No
difference between psychologist or teacher-led
groups. SCAS-C outcomes maintained at 6 mo
follow up (d=0.39*; d=0.39*). NB: Those lost to
follow up (n=155) not included in analysis.
Stallard et
al., 2007
(43.4%)
Pre- post evaluation of pupils (n=106)
from 3 schools taking part in the
FRIENDS intervention.
No controls employed.
• SCAS-Child version.
• Culture-free Self-esteem
questionnaire (CFSEQ).
‘T1’: 6mo
prior;
‘T2’: prior to
intervention;
‘T3’: 3-mo fup.
Improvements in SCAS (d=-0.50*) and CFSEQ
(d=0.58*) from T1 to T3 for whole sample; not
between T2 and T3 (across intervention).
Improvements on both measures (d=-1.26*; d=-
1.27*) for ‘high risk’ group between T2-T3.
Stallard et
al., 2014
(75%)
Cluster randomised controlled trial
randomised through computer tool.
Health-led FRIENDS (n=489) x School
led FRIENDS (n=472) x Controls
(n=401). ¹
• Revised Child Anxiety and
Depression Scale (RCADS 30) – child
& parent.
• Penn State Worry Q’aire.
• Rosenberg Self Esteem Scale.
• Bully / victim q’aire.
• Subjective wellbeing assessment.
• SDQ- Parent version; teachers
completed ‘Impact scale’.
Baseline;
6 mo f-up;
12 mo f-up.
Improvement on total RCADS (d=0.20*) and
social (d=-0.09*) & general anxiety subscales
(d=-0.20*) - not depression. Smaller effect sizes
in school led group (d=0.02*; d=0.11*; d=0.01*;).
No statistical improvements on secondary
outcome measures or teacher / parent rating
scales.
Page 23 of 108
1 Study sufficiently powered to detect change. ² Power calculation provided but proportion lost to follow up (>15%) reduced sample required for adequate power. *Significant at p<0.5 level.
SCAS-C = Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale; SDQ – Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire; PATHS = Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies; CFSEQ = Culture-free Self-esteem questionnaire;
RCADS = Revised Child Anxiety and Depression Scale; CSI = Coping Strategy Indicator
Table 3. Design and outcome characteristics of Secondary school based studies.
Study (%
quality
rating)
Study Design Measures Follow-up Effects / outcomes
Boniwell
et al.
2016
(37.5%)
Non-randomised control
group pre-post design.
‘Personal Wellbeing’
intervention group (n=211)
x control group (n=85).
• Students’ Life Satisfaction Scale (SLSS
).
• Multidimensional Students Life
Satisfaction Scale (MSLSS).
• Positive & Negative Affect Schedule
for Children (PNASC).
• Qualitative interviews.
Baseline;
Postintervention
(10 mo f-up)
No significant improvement on SLSS or
MSLSS. Decrease in ‘satisfaction with
school’(d=0.4*) and ‘friends’ (d=-0.17)
scores for whole sample. Decrease in
positive affect for both intervention and
control groups (d=-0.24*; -0.79*); increase
in negative affect (d=0.54*) for control
group. NB: Those lost to follow up (n=103)
not accounted for in analysis.
Page 24 of 108
Challen et
al. 2014
(78.1%)
Non-randomised pragmatic
controlled trial.
UKRP intervention (n=1016)
group x Control (n=1894)
group.1
• Children’s Depression Inventory (CDI).
• Revised Children’s Manifest Anxiety
Scale (RCMAS).
• SDQ.
Baseline;
post
intervention
(4-9 mo);
1 yr f-up;
2 yr f-up.
Small significant impact on CDI postintervention (d=0.093*); not maintained at
1 or 2 year follow up. No significant effects
on RCMAS or SDQ scores.
Chisholm
et al.
2016

(75%)
Pragmatic cluster
randomised controlled
trail, randomised by
independent researcher.
‘Contact and MH
Education’ (n=354) group x
MH Education (n=303)
group.2 No ‘as usual’
controls.
• Reported and Intended Behaviour Scale
(RIBS) (not validated for adolescents).
• Mental Health Knowledge Schedule
(MAKS) (not validated for
adolescents).
• SDQ.
• Resilience scale.
• Helpseeking Q.
• Focus groups.
Baseline – 2
weeks prior
to
intervention
day;
2 weeks
postintervention
day.
Statistical sig. improvements on several
scales post intervention day for both groups
– ‘contact and education’ and ‘education
only’: Attitudinal based stigma (d=0.23*;
d=0.25*), knowledge based stigma (d=0.54*;
d=0.59*), mental health literacy (d=0.05;
d=0.13*;) emotional wellbeing (d=0.16*;
d=0.14*), and resilience (d=0.07; d=0.22*).
No change in ‘helpseeking’.
Kuyken et
al. 2013
(59%)
Non-randomised controlled
feasibility study.
MiSP intervention group
(n=256) x control (n=266)
• Warwick- Edinburgh Mental Wellbeing
Scale (WEMWBS).
• Perceived Stress Scale (PSS).
• Center for Epidemiologic Studies
Depression Scale (CES-D).
• Mindfulness practice rating.
Baseline;
Postintervention
(9 weeks);
3 mo f-up.
Lower depression scores post-intervention
(d=-0.29*). Improvement on all measures at
3 mo f-up (WEMWBS: d=0.15*; PSS: d=-
0.09*; CES-D: d=-0.24*). More mindfulness
practice significantly associated with
greater gains across all measures (unable to
calculate E.S.).
Rice et al.
2015
(50%)
Non-randomised
longitudinal design with
three intervention
conditions.
TRY intervention group
(n=50) x CBT group (n=53) x
MBCT group (n=54) x PHSE
controls (n=99)
• Short Mood & Feelings Questionnaire
(SMFQ).
• Cambridge Gambling Task (CGT) to
measure reward seeking.
• Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale for
Children (DASC) and corresponding
response time.
• Sentence completion for Events from
the Past (SCEPT) to measure
overgeneral memory.
Baseline;
9 week fup.
Statistical sig. changes in reward seeking in
TRY group (d=0.12*); no change after CBT
or MBCT. Changes in negative belief
response times and over-general memory
did not reach significance. No statistically
significant decrease in SMFQ across groups
compared to PHSE controls. When
comparing treatment groups only, TRY
showed statistical reduction in SMFQ when
compared with MBCT and CBT (d=-0.8*);
reward-seeking moderated reductions in
 1 Study sufficiently powered to detect change.
2 Power calculation provided but proportion lost to follow up (>15%) reduced sample required for adequate power. *statistically significant at p < 0.05 level.
SLSS – Student’s Life Satisfaction Scale; MSLSS = Multidimensional Students Life Satisfactions Scale; PNASC = Positive and Negative Affect Schedule for Children; CDI = Children’s Depression Inventory; RCMAS =
Revised Children’s Manifest Anxiety Scale; SDQ = Strength and Difficulties Questionnaires; RIBS = Reported and Intended Behaviour Scale; WEMWBS = Warwick Edinburgh Mental Wellbeing Scale; PSS = Perceived
Stress Scale; CES-D = Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale; SMFQ = Short Mood and Feelings Questionnaire; CGT = Cambridge Gambling Task; DASC = Dysfunctional Attitudes Scale for Children
Page 25 of 108
SMFQs scores (d=1.62*).
Naylor et
al. 2009
(56.3%)
Non-randomised pre-post
control group study.
MH intervention group
(n=175) x Control group (n242).1
• Mental Health Q’aire (unvalidated).
• SDQ.
Baseline (1
week before
intervention
);
6 mo postintervention
.
Improvement in MHQ with regards to
awareness of depression causes (d=0.21*)
and bullying (d=0.31*). Changes in specific
SDQ subscales: ‘conduct’ (d=0.22*) and
‘prosocial’ (d=0.11*) but not on total
difficulties.
Stallard
et al.
2013
(81.3%)
Cluster randomised
controlled trial,
randomised by computer.
UK-RAP intervention group
(n=1753) x Attention
controls (n=1673) x PHSE
controls (n=1604)¹
• SMFQ.
• Children’s Automatic Thoughts Scale
(CATS).
• Rosenberg Self Esteem Scale.
• RCADS.
• School connectedness Scale.
• Attachment Q’aire for children.
• European Quality of Life-5
dimensions.
• Client Service Receipt Inventory
(CSRI).
• Focus groups.
Screening –
SMFQ only;
Baseline;
6 mo f-up;
12mo f-up.
No significant effect on SMFQ at 12 mo fups. Some effect of intervention on
bullying status at 12 mo, and Cannabis use
at 6mo and 12 mo f-up. Intervention less
useful than usual PHSE or attention
controls for panic symptoms; less useful
than usual PHSE on CATS ‘personal failure’
scores and general anxiety.
Signs of benefits and harm of intervention
found, all were reported to be small effect
sizes (data unavailable to calculate effect
size).
1 Study sufficiently powered to detect change. ² Power calculation provided but proportion lost to follow up (>15%) reduced sample required for adequate power. *Significant at p<0.5 level.
Page 26 of 108
IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
Common issues relating to implementation were found across all studies.
Fidelity
Fidelity to intervention delivery was highlighted as an issue both in terms
of measurement and outcome. Studies used self-rated fidelity methods (Collins
et al., 2013), external fidelity ratings on a proportion of sessions (Stallard et al.,
2014; Stallard et al., 2013; Challen et al. 2014; Chisholm et al., 2016; Berry et
al., 2016) or no fidelity rating methods reported at all. Studies commented
variably on the possible effect of fidelity and ‘treatment dosage’ on outcomes.
In Stallard et al.’s (2014) study the health-led condition with 100% fidelity (i.e.
administered all pieces of homework and activity tasks) was associated with
significantly better outcomes than the school-led group who achieved 60-80%
fidelity. ‘High quality’ workshops were also found to be related to greater
declines in CDI measures (Challen et al., 2014). Conversely, Berry et al. (2016)
found that fidelity (when applying an arbitrary ‘80%’ rate of ‘high’ fidelity) was
not found to be related to outcome.
Attrition
Investment from schools was raised as an issue as demonstrated by school
participation and attrition (Stallard et al., 2013; Berry et al., 2016), and failure
to administer follow up measures as per study procedures (Collins et al., 2013;
Boniwell et al., 2016). All studies, with the exception of Stallard et al. (2013)
provided little information about school or participant characteristics of those
who dropped out. This confounding factor may have positively biased results. For
instance, in Kuyken et al’s (2013) study, teachers who delivered the mindfulness
intervention had been invested in the intervention for approximately 2 years
before the beginning of the study and attended regular supervision,
demonstrating good motivation throughout the study which found positive
outcomes.
Costs
Two studies actively explored health economic costs involved (Berry et
al., 2016; Stallard et al., 2013). Cost-effectiveness was not calculated by Berry
et al. (2016) due to lack of impact, and Stallard et al. (2013) concluded that the
Page 27 of 108
intervention was not cost-effective. Of note, both studies may have sustained
high costs due to employing external facilitators to lead the intervention rather
than teachers (Stallard et al., 2013) and hiring ‘coach consultants’ to monitor
delivery (Berry et al., 2016).
Page 28 of 108
DISCUSSION
This review aimed to explore the effectiveness and study quality of
universally delivered school based interventions within the UK which aim to
promote mental and emotional wellbeing, or prevent mental ill health. Several
clear conclusions can be drawn from this review, while other issues require
further clarity from future research.
How effective are universal school based interventions in the UK that
promote mental health, emotional wellbeing, or psychological resilience and
what tools are being used to measure effectiveness?
Based on the studies included in this review, the effectiveness of
universal school based interventions remains mixed, and at best, modest. Where
there were several positive outcomes, effect sizes were small and
methodological issues rendered many results to be interpreted with caution.
Studies based in Primary schools seemed to find more encouraging results
from CBT-based interventions on measures of anxiety, although most studies had
methodological limitations relating to use of appropriate controls, and failure to
include of those lost to follow up in analysis. Positive results tended to fall in
the older age range of Primary school pupils (9-12 years old).
Within the Secondary school population, the most positive results were
obtained when delivering mental health education sessions, behavioural or
mindfulness interventions. Two high powered, good quality studies evaluating
CBT based interventions within secondary populations found few significant
results and one study indicated possible detrimental impacts of the intervention
compared to controls, although any effect sizes related to these findings were
small.
It is curious that studies fail to detect promising effects in the older,
secondary school, population. It could be argued that 2 year follow up is not
sufficient to truly detect change or prevention during the developmentallysensitive time that is adolescence. Arguably, the demands placed on adolescents
merely change in nature rather than impact over time. Adolescent psychosocial
development (Erikson, 1968) is particularly vulnerable as individuals are required
Page 29 of 108
to manage academic demands as they progress through their school career,
navigate friendships, seek to develop self-identities and deal with the
physiological changes that occur as they transition through puberty. It could be
that the existence of such pervasive and fluctuating stressors juxtaposed with
measurement issues, discussed below, contribute to the failure to detect
significant results in secondary school populations. Or, that such interventions
simply have less impact for this population.
What methodologies are being applied in UK schools when trialling
interventions and what is the quality of these studies?
Methodological issues were predominant in this review. Only four of the
studies were of ‘excellent’ quality and findings indicated a trend towards higher
quality papers finding fewer positive results. Studies were weakened largely due
to their lack of randomisation and blinding of researchers, and small sample
sizes which likely rendered them underpowered to detect true effects.
While it was encouraging that initial consenting rates were high and
remained reasonable throughout, study quality would benefit from better
reporting of those lost to follow up who, possibly, could be a population of
particular interest when considering the objective of promoting mental and
emotional wellbeing for all within the school setting. Further, statistical
methods used to account for such missing data require careful consideration to
ensure that more stringent and conservative methods, for example, intent-totreat analyses, are applied in school-based research. Otherwise, studies that
instead apply a ‘defined completers’ or ‘completers’ analysis expose themselves
to the risk of yielding false positives.
Another issue was the use of controls. Few studies explicitly provided
details of the content controls received. Some indicated that controls may have
received materials already available in the school around social and emotional
wellbeing, which could reasonably have confounded results. Additionally,
considering the demographic data provided, it is unlikely that the included
studies accurately represent the cultural diversity of schools across the UK,
Formatted: Not Highlight
Page 30 of 108
therefore caution should be taken when considering the generalizability of
results.
The last prominent issue highlighted in this study was the diverse use of
measures and length of follow up across studies, making it difficult to ascertain
a coherent picture of measurement and effects in the current research base.
As commented in one study (Challen et al., 2014) and further afield
(Reavley et al., 2015), measurement issues within universal populations are
particularly problematic due to common floor effects which exist, particularly
when using measures pertaining to the existence of mental health conditions. As
has been well-documented, demonstrating improvement in ‘high risk’ groups is
somewhat easier as baseline scores are often elevated providing scope for
reduction (Stallard, 2013). Demonstrating change within a universal population is
therefore inherently more difficult and requires careful thought when moving
forward. Is it sufficient that the absence of a mental health condition equates to
greater wellbeing or resilience as suggested by Boniwell et al. (2016), or should
researchers direct attention to explicitly measuring wellbeing and resilience and
mechanisms of change within such constructs in order to truly operationalise
factors relating to the prevention of mental health difficulties.
Few studies in this review used wellbeing or resilience measures.
However, those that did (Kuyken et al., 2013; Chisholm et al., 2016) found
positive effects. While any meaning of these results must be taken with caution
due to methodological issues, this nevertheless suggests that such measures are
at least able to detect change within a universal population.
Only one study explored mechanisms of change (Rice et al., 2015) by
using cognitive reasoning tests when comparing several interventions, and found
that a behavioural intervention led to more reward-seeking and a reduction in
mood symptoms. It would be of value to explore this further given the
neurodevelopmental stage of adolescence when frontal lobes are still maturing
and neuronal connections continue to grow (Spear, 2013). Consequently, the
adolescent’s ability to plan, problem solve and manipulate abstract information,
as is arguably necessary in cognitive-based interventions, may be overridden by
more disinhibited, emotionally driven impulses and the seeking of concrete
Page 31 of 108
rewards, as may be seen in earlier adolescence and would potentially explain
increased receptiveness to a behavioural, rather than cognitive intervention.
What are the identified barriers in delivering and evaluating universal
school based interventions?
Implementation barriers relating to fidelity to intervention delivery and
costs were also raised within this review. Variance in fidelity measurement to
confirm reliable manualised delivery was a recurring issue, which is of particular
salience when delivery has been consistently argued to be related to outcome
(Durlak et al, 2011; Weare & Nind, 2011). Intervention delivery itself varied
between studies where school staff or external researchers delivered the
courses. While results in specific studies were mixed when comparing the
effectiveness of teacher-led versus externally-led interventions, overall within
this review the results were neutral suggesting, at best, that there is no negative
impact of teacher delivery. While issues relating to treatment fidelity may be
more prominent with teacher delivery, considering sustainability, it could be
argued that this would be the optimal approach in school settings, especially
considering the financial costs involved in bringing in external facilitators as
demonstrated by two studies in this review (Berry et al., 2016; Stallard et al.,
2013). Further, research has indicated that pupils prefer both that mental health
education be delivered by someone with a thorough knowledge of the subject,
and for it to be delivered by someone they know e.g., a teacher (Woolfson et
al., 2008).
No study in this review explored the impact on any allied services such as
CAMHS. For instance, it may be useful to audit local CAMHS referral-rates whilst
reviewing the effectiveness of school-based interventions. Considering the
absence of reliable positive outcomes at the individual level at this point, a
systemic perspective could be of value when considering any cost benefits on
the wider health and social care service.
Further, it was unclear from the review what political or strategic drivers
instigated each study, and indeed, how much children and young people were
consulted in the process, design and delivery of the interventions. It was outside
Page 32 of 108
the scope of this review to explore the qualitative findings from the few studies
that employed focus groups. Therefore, it is recommended that future
qualitative reviews of school based research are conducted in order to ensure
the children’s and young people’s views as stakeholders in this work are
sufficiently represented.
Limitations
This study was limited in its ability to source evaluations representative of
the entire UK as the majority of studies were based in England. While efforts
were made to source evaluations from elsewhere in the UK, the lack of validated
measures or application of pre-post methodology meant that such evaluations
from ‘grey literature’ could not be included in this review. It should therefore
be noted that there is much relevant work being conducted in UK schools.
However, schools and local authorities should be urged to reliably evaluate their
valuable efforts and contribute to the literature area, thereby justifying and
demonstrating the work being driven by teachers and policymakers nationwide.
This study was also limited in its date source in that only studies from the
year 2000 were included in this review. While results from other systematic
reviews suggested that little relevant research was done in the UK before this
time, it could still be that some studies were missed due to this limit.
Implications
This review highlighted the need to employ robust methodological designs
within school-based research in order for any effects to be interpreted
meaningfully. Measurement issues exist where they do not adequately detect
change in universal populations, and there is a wide variety in measures used
ranging from ‘clinical’ to wellbeing measures. This review concludes that schoolbased researchers across the UK should attempt to come together to discuss
ways to address this issue and improve coherence in the literature.
An additional, imperative implication from this review is the proactive
inclusion and involvement of teachers in this work. As has been commented
elsewhere (Weare, 2015) without the ‘buy-in’ from teachers, any school based
intervention is less likely to sustain or achieve positive outcomes. In a time of
Page 33 of 108
additional pressures on teachers, the need to feel in control of initiatives is key.
Of note, two of the studies in this review included adult-focussed exercises for
the teachers themselves as an adjunct to the intervention training. This
approach may go further to assist teachers’ own stress levels and understanding
of mental health whilst attending to the needs of their pupils.
Conclusions
The current evidence suggests there are neutral to small effects of
universal, school-based interventions in the UK that aim to promote emotional or
mental wellbeing or prevention of mental health difficulties. Whilst the realworld limitations of conducting research in schools exists, robust, long-term
methodologies need to be attempted when conducting research in this area in
order to explore the longitudinal impact of school-based interventions on
wellbeing; academic attainment, school attendance and rates of high-risk
presentations also need to be explored. This requires adequate recording of
fidelity, the use of validated measures sensitive to mechanisms of change,
reporting of those lost to follow up and any adverse effects, and the use of
qualitative data to supplement quantitative outcomes. Interventions in the
existing UK-based literature include educational, behavioural, cognitive and
mindfulness components, each demonstrating variable results. Nevertheless,
national and local policy (Department of Education, 2016; CYMRU, 2010;
Education Scotland, no publication date) indicates that there remains an
appetite to develop work in this area in order to promote wellbeing outcomes
for children and young people. In this case, further research collaborations are
required across the UK to demonstrate any benefits for pupils or on the wider
system.