Abstract
It is well-documented that cyberbullying and victimization co-occur with traditional forms indicating that they share similar mechanisms. Therefore, it was hypothesized that the general antibullying program ViSC might also be effective in tackling these new forms of bullying. A longitudinal randomized control group design has been applied to examine the program effectiveness in 18 schools. In total, 2,042 students in Grades 5 to 7 (47.3% girls) aged 11.7 (SD = 0.9) attending 105 classes participated in the study. Utilizing a multiple group bivariate latent change score model controlling for traditional aggression, traditional victimization, and age, results demonstrate program effectiveness for cyberbullying (latent d = 0.39) and cyber victimization (latent d = 0.29) indicating that these behaviors reflect a systemic (school) problem.

KEYWORDS:

cyberbullyingcyber victimizationbullyingvictimizationearly adolescenceprogramevaluationeffectiveness
Previous article
View issue table of contents
Next article
Many studies document student’s involvement in cyberbullying and cyber victimization, a new form of harassment carried out through the use of new media (Smith et al., Citation2008). Recently, guidelines how to best prevent cyberbullying have been published (e.g., Välimäki et al., Citation2012), and programs how to specifically tackle cyberbullying have been developed (e.g., Pieschl & Porsch, Citation2013). International comparison studies suggest that cyberbullying is frequent in countries where traditional bullying rates are also high (Livingstone, Haddon, Görzig, & Ólafsson, Citation2011). Furthermore, cyberbullying co-occurs with traditional bullying (Kowalski, Giumetti, Schroeder, & Lattanner, Citation2014) indicating that cyberbullying might be part of a systemic school problem. Given the similarity of motives underlying youths’ involvement in cyberbullying and traditional bullying (Gradinger, Strohmeier, & Spiel, Citation2012) it is conceivable to assume that programs tackling traditional bullying are also effective in preventing cyberbullying.

The main goal of the present study is to examine whether a general antibullying program is able to also change cyberbullying and cyber victimization. The main hypothesis was tested by investigating the effectiveness of the ViSC Social Competence Program (Strohmeier, Hoffmann, Schiller, Stefanek, & Spiel, Citation2012), which has been implemented within the Austrian national strategy to prevent violence in schools since 2008 (Spiel & Strohmeier, Citation2011).

Cyberbullying and Psychosocial Problems
According to an international comparison study, 2% to 14% of 9- to 16-year-old youths living in 25 European countries experienced cyber victimization at least once during the last year (Livingstone et al., Citation2011). In this country-comparative study, information regarding traditional victimization has also been collected and demonstrates that cyber victimization is more common in countries where traditional victimization is also more common, rather than in countries where the Internet is more established. This cross-national finding suggests that cyberbullying is rather a new form of a long-established problem than simply the consequence of a new technology.

Similar to traditional bullying and victimization, cyber victims and cyberbullies report a lot of psychosocial problems (Kowalski et al., Citation2014). Based on this meta-analysis of cross-sectional studies, involvement in cyber victimization is associated with higher levels of depression, anxiety, loneliness, drug and alcohol use, conduct problems, emotional problems, somatic symptoms, stress, and suicidal ideation and lower levels of self-esteem, academic achievement, life-satisfaction, and prosocial behavior. In addition, higher involvement in cyberbullying is related to higher levels of depression, anxiety, loneliness, drug and alcohol use, and to lower levels of self-esteem, academic achievement, and life satisfaction.

Regarding age, a high variability regarding prevalence rates have been reported in the literature. In the EU-Kids Online II study cyber-victimization rates increased from 3% to 8% between the ages 9 and 16 (Livingstone et al., Citation2011). Kowalski and colleagues (Citation2014) did not find this age effect for cyber victimization in their meta-analysis, but reported an increase regarding cyberbullying depending on age. Finally, Tokunaga (Citation2010) suggested a curvilinear relation between age and cyber victimization, peaking in seventh and eighth graders making them—and younger age groups—especially suitable for prevention efforts.

Similarly, gender effects of cyberbullying and cyber victimization are inconclusive. Some studies found more boys cyberbullied others than girls (e.g., Gradinger, Strohmeier, & Spiel, Citation2009; Katzer, Fetchenhauer, & Belschak, Citation2009), some found no gender differences (e.g., Gradinger, Strohmeier, & Spiel, Citation2012; Smith et al., Citation2008), and still others reported higher cyberbullying rates for girls than for boys (e.g., Pornari & Wood, Citation2010). Similar inconsistencies have been reported regarding cyber victimization (Tokunaga, Citation2010).

Based on these inconclusive findings, both age and gender are potential moderator variables to consider when investigating the effectiveness of prevention programs.

Cyberbullying Prevention
There is a need for theoretically grounded, rigorously implemented and evaluated programs to prevent (cyber)bullying (e.g., Ttofi & Farrington, Citation2011). Meta-analyses show that general antibullying prevention programs are effective in reducing traditional bullying and victimization (e.g., Farrington & Ttofi, Citation2009; Ttofi & Farrington, Citation2011), and some are also effective in preventing cyberbullying and cyber victimization (e.g., the KiVa Program; Williford et al., Citation2013). Because prevention efforts can also yield deleterious effects, it is important to rigorously investigate the effectiveness of programs before dissemination (Beelmann, Citation2006).

Both specific cyberbullying and more general antibullying prevention programs need to undergo a rigorous developmental process, before they are ready to be largely disseminated (Flay et al., Citation2005). One of the first steps is to develop and empirically test etiological models including risk and protective factors. However, longitudinal research on cyberbullying and victimization is rare (Badaly, Kelly, Schwartz, & Dabney-Lieras, Citation2012; Fanti, Demetriou, & Hawa, Citation2012; Gradinger, Strohmeier, Schiller, Stefanek, & Spiel, Citation2012; Hemphill et al., Citation2012; Schiller, Gradinger, & Strohmeier, Citation2014; Sticca, Ruggieri, Alsaker, & Perren, Citation2013), which makes it difficult to design prevention programs. Furthermore, new prevention programs need to be implemented under optimal (experimental) and real conditions in the (school) system, to prove efficacy and effectiveness before they are ready for a larger roll out (Flay et al., Citation2005).

Based on the socioecological model (Swearer & Espelage, Citation2004), risk and protective factors for cyberbullying and victimization are located on the individual, peer group, family, school, and community level. On the individual level consistent evidence shows that cyberbullying is positively related to cyber victimization, but also to traditional bullying and victimization (Kowalski et al., Citation2014). As those four behaviors covary within individuals and pure cyberbullies or pure cyber victims hardly exist (Gradinger et al., Citation2009), prevention efforts against traditional bullying and victimization will likely also impact cyberbullying and cyber victimization. On the contextual level, perceived support (peer context), high parental monitoring (family context), good school climate and school safety (school context) have been identified as protective factors for both traditional and cyberbullying and traditional victimization and cyber victimization (Eisner & Malti, Citation2012, Kowalski et al., Citation2014).

To summarize, it is likely that a general antibullying program it also able to prevent cyberbullying and cyber victimization, because both traditional and cyberbullying have several risk and protective factors in common and because students involved in many forms of bullying are reached by a general school developmental program.

The ViSC Social Competence Program
The ViSC program was developed, implemented, and evaluated as one component of the Austrian national strategy plan (Spiel & Strohmeier, Citation2011, Citation2012). ViSC is a primary preventive program including secondary preventive elements (a) to reduce aggressive behavior and bullying and (b) to foster social and intercultural competencies in schools. The ViSC program engages a systemic perspective and is designed for secondary schools (Grades 5 to 8). It consists of an initial one-year implementation phase and follows a cascaded train-the-trainer model within which scientists train multipliers, multipliers train teachers, and teachers train their students. During the first semester the program covers interventions and preventive measures on the school level and teachers are the primary target group to change (see also Strohmeier, Hoffmann, et al., Citation2012). Preventive measures on class level are introduced to the teachers during the second semester. In the second semester the target groups to change are both teachers and students. During the program implementation, teachers are trained in (a) how to recognize bullying cases, (b) how to tackle acute bullying cases, and (c) how to implement preventive measures on the school and the class levels. The class project aims to empower students to take the responsibility for what happens in their class. The class project is divided into two parts. During Units 1 to 8, the students’ lessons cover important aspects for bullying prevention. Within student-centered instruction, they actively work together to find ways to prevent aggressive behavior in their class. During Units 9 to 13, the students design a little project and thus work together to achieve a positive, common goal (for details see Atria, Strohmeier, & Spiel, Citation2007; Strohmeier, Hoffman, et al., Citation2012) and practice their social skills. The class project does not include units to directly change the behavior of a bullying student, nor does it include specific units to tackle cyberbullying and cyber victimization. Instead, the class project aims to create an environment in which it is less likely that bullying occurs. The theoretical idea is that aggressive behavior less likely occurs in an encouraging, structured, and friendly environment where students are able to feel part of a nice group and are able to create common successes (for more details see Strohmeier, Hoffman, et al., Citation2012).

The Present Study
Considering the high prevalence rates and manifold negative psychosocial consequences for cyberbullies and cyber victims, there is a need for high quality prevention programs. Unfortunately, empirical knowledge on longitudinal risk and protective factors for cyberbullying and cyber victimization is rare, and etiological models including individual and contextual level variables are still lacking. Therefore, we argue to use the existing knowledge generated in traditional bullying research to prevent cyberbullying and cyber victimization. It is worthwhile to investigate general antibullying programs regarding their effectiveness for cyberbullying and cyber victimization, because (a) traditional and cyber forms of harassment co-occur and (b) similar contextual risk factors have been identified for traditional and cyberbullying and traditional and cyber victimization. For this reason, the present study investigated the effectiveness of the ViSC Social Competence Program over one year in reducing cyberbullying and cyber victimization. Effectiveness of the program was defined as mean difference of change over time between control and intervention group. We expected that cyberbullying and cyber victimization had a steeper decrease or lower increase (buffer effect) in an intervention group compared to a control group. More specifically, we examined intervention effects controlling for traditional aggression, traditional victimization, gender and age. In addition, we addressed the question of how change in cyberbullying and cyber victimization was related to pretest scores of cyberbullying, cyber victimization, traditional aggression, traditional victimization, gender, and age.

METHOD
Design and Procedure
In December 2008, all secondary schools located in the capital city of Austria were invited to participate in the ViSC program. Out of all 155 secondary schools located in Vienna, 34 schools applied for participation from which 26 schools fulfilled the necessary requirements (e.g., the willingness to participate in the evaluation study). Applying a randomized control group design, 13 schools were randomly assigned to the intervention group and five out of the 13 remaining schools agreed to serve as control schools. The program was implemented during the 2009/10 academic year (between September 2009 and June 2010). Data were gathered at two time points: May/June 2009 (pretest) and May/June 2010 (posttest). After local school council and the school principals accepted the study, active parental consent was obtained. Seventy-one percent of students were present at the day of data collection and had parental consent to participate in the study. Data were collected through Internet-based questionnaires that were completed during one regular school hour in the school’s computer lab under the supervision of two trained research assistants. The order of the items within scales was counterbalanced to avoid any systematic order effect. Prior to data collection students were assured that their answers would be kept confidential.

Participants
In total, 2,042 students (1,377 in intervention group, 665 in control group) located in 18 schools participated in at least one occasion of measurement and were included in the current study. At Wave 1 (pretest), the sample comprised 1,639 students (47.6% girls) from 103 classrooms (50 fifth-grade classes, 51 sixth-grade classes, and 2 seventh-grade classes) with a mean age of 11.7 years (SD = 0.9, Min = 10, Max = 15). According to a commonly used classification system (see Stefanek, Strohmeier, van de Schoot, & Spiel, Citation2011), 46.4% of the students were native Austrians, 20.2% from former Yugoslavia, 14.3% from Turkey, and 19.1% from other countries. Regarding socioeconomic status, 9.4% of students stated that their family would have less, 71.7% as much as, and 18.9% more money compared with other families. Of the participants, 65.2% indicated that they used mobile phones and 37.5% stated that they used the Internet several times a day, while 2.3% stated that they had never used either mobile phones or the Internet. Table 1 provides a description of the sample separately for intervention and control group. The two groups were compared on pretest demographic characteristics using a series of Pearson’s chi-square tests with Yates’ continuity correction, a two-sample t-test, and two Mann-Whitney U-tests. Results showed that the two groups were fairly comparable. However, there was a statistically significant difference in mobile phone usage between students in the two groups, z = −2.44, p < .05, r = .002. This difference was negligible in terms of effect size.

TABLE 1 Demographic Characteristics of the Sample by Intervention and Control Groups at Pretest

Download CSVDisplay Table
Missing Data
In total, 974 records (47.7%) were incomplete resulting from two main missing data patterns: students who participated at pretest only (n = 515) and students who participated at posttest only (n = 403). The remaining 56 students had a general missing data pattern with missing value in single scales. The percentage of missing values across the 78 variables varied between 19.7% and 16.1%. Multiple imputation (Rubin, Citation1987) under the missing at random assumption was used to deal with missing data. Incomplete variables were imputed under fully conditional specification (i.e., multivariate missing data were imputed on a variable-by-variable basis; van Buuren, Brand, Groothuis-Oudshoorn, & Rubin, Citation2006). Thus, an imputation model for each incomplete variable was specified to create imputations in an iterative fashion. Imputation models were based on an inclusive analysis strategy incorporating not only all variables used in the main analysis, but also numerous auxiliary variables into the missing data handling procedure (Collins, Schafer, & Kam, Citation2001). Each variable was imputed with the predictive mean matching algorithm (van Buuren, Citation2012) using Tukey’s tricube weighting function (Harrell, Citation2006). A total of 50 imputed data sets were extracted during the imputation process. In order to preserve interactions between the grouping variable and other variables, the imputation process was conducted for intervention and control group separately (R. J. A. Little & Rubin, Citation2002). After creating the complete data sets, statistical analyses were conducted on each imputed dataset separately and subsequently pooled using Rubin’s rules (Citation1987) to combine the parameter estimates and standard errors into a single set of results. Calculations were done in R (R Core Team, Citation2014) using mice package (van Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, Citation2011) and miceadds package (Robitzsch, Citation2014). Note that methodologists currently regard multiple imputations as a state-of-the-art technique because it improves accuracy and statistical power relative to other missing data handling methods (Schafer & Graham, Citation2002). Moreover, the missing data problem is handled during data preparation resulting in a clear separation of missing data model and analysis model. In contrast, the full information maximum likelihood method does not provide a consistent data basis over different statistical analysis, because missing data are handled during the data analysis process (Enders, Citation2010).

Measures
Cyberbullying and cyber victimization
Self-reported cyberbullying and cyber victimization were measured with two scales, each containing seven specific items related to different electronic means based on Smith et al. (Citation2008), and covering a time span of 2 months (e.g., cyberbullying calls, “How often have you insulted or hurt other students by mean calls during the last two months”? and cyber victimization calls, “How often have you been insulted or hurt by receiving mean calls in the last two months from other students?”). The different electronic means were calls, text messages, e-mails, chat contributions, discussion board, instant messages, and video or photos. Answers to all questions were given on a 5-point response scale (0 = not at all, 1 = once or twice, 2 = two or three times a month, 3 = once a week, and 4 = nearly every day). Cronbach’s α coefficients for the cyberbullying scale were .95/.96 (pretest/posttest) and .92/.95 (pretest/posttest) for the cyber victimization scale.

Traditional aggression and traditional victimization were measured with three scales, (a) bullying perpetration and bullying victimization, (b) physical aggression and physical victimization, and (c) relational aggression and relational victimization. All items cover global as well as specific bullying and victimization behavior covering a time span of two months.

Bullying perpetration and bullying victimization
Self-reported bullying and victimization were each measured by a scale consisting of a global item and three specific items covering different forms of bullying (Strohmeier, Gradinger, Schabmann, & Spiel, Citation2012). In the global item, students were asked, “How often have you insulted or hurt other students during the last two months?” (global bullying perpetration) and “How often have other students insulted or hurt you in the last two months?” (global bullying victimization). The three specific items were similar to the global ones, except that they described specific forms of bullying and victimization, for example, “How often have you insulted or hurt other students by verbally harassing them during the last two months?” (bullying perpetrator verbal) or “How often have other students insulted or hurt you by verbally harassing you during the last two months?” (bullying victimization verbal). Cronbach’s α coefficients were .82/.83 (pretest/posttest) for the bullying perpetration scale and .81/.82 (pretest/posttest) for the bullying victimization scale.

Physical aggression and physical victimization
The peer nomination measure developed by Crick and Grotpeter (Citation1995) was modified into a self-report questionnaire and consisted of three items, for example, “How often have you hit one or more classmates during the last two months?” (physical aggression) or “How often have you been hit by one or more classmates during the last two months?” (physical victimization). Cronbach’s α coefficients were .79/.79 (pretest/posttest) for the physical aggression scale and .74/.76 (pretest/posttest) for the physical victimization scale.

Relational aggression and relational victimization
These five items were also adapted from the peer nomination measure originally developed by Crick and Grotpeter (Citation1995), including, “Some kids leave other kids out on purpose when it’s time to play or do an activity. How often have you done that during the last two months?” (relational aggression) or “How often during the last two months have you been excluded from play or another activity by one or more classmates?” (relational victimization). Cronbach’s α coefficients were .83/.87 (pretest/posttest) for the relational aggression scale and .82/.81 (pretest/posttest) for the relational victimization scale. Answers to all questions were given on a 5-point response scale (0 = not at all, 1 = once or twice, 2 = two or three times a month, 3 = once a week, and 4 = nearly every day).

Measurement Model and Measurement Invariance
A series of confirmatory factor analysis were conducted to establish measurement models for cyberbullying and cyber victimization as well as traditional aggression and victimization. Moreover all measurement models were tested for longitudinal and between-group (control vs. intervention) measurement invariance. The measurement models for cyberbullying and cyber victimization are both one-factor models, each comprising seven indicators. Traditional aggression and victimization is based on a second-order factor model comprising three latent factors measured by multiple items. Figure 1 shows the measurement model for traditional aggression at pretest.

FIGURE 1 Measurement model of traditional aggression at pretest. Unstandardized parameter estimates. Statistically significant results at α = .05 are shown in bold.

FIGURE 1 Measurement model of traditional aggression at pretest. Unstandardized parameter estimates. Statistically significant results at α = .05 are shown in bold.
Display full size
All measurement models were tested for strong measurement invariance (i.e., factor loadings and intercept were constrained to be equal across time and between control and intervention group). Results yield acceptable model fit (see Table 2) indicating sound measurement properties of all scales. In order to reduce model complexity (i.e., number of estimated parameters), factor scores for traditional aggression and victimization were extracted and subsequently used in the main analysis.

TABLE 2 Model Fit of the Measurement Models Assuming Strong Invariance

Download CSVDisplay Table
Analytic Strategies
A structural equation modeling (SEM) approach was used to test the main hypotheses of the study. More specifically, a bivariate multiple group latent change score (LCS) model (McArdle, Citation2001) comparing intervention and control group was applied. The basic idea of the LCS model is based on the following equation:


Following this rationale, the change between pre- and posttest (i.e., score at posttest – score at pretest) is captured as a latent variable. Moreover, the latent change score as part of the model can be statistically controlled for pretest scores and additional covariates. Thus, the mean of the latent change score variable represents the expected mean value for participants with average pretest scores and all covariates equal zero. A positive sign indicates an increase, while a negative sign indicates a decrease over time. In the main analysis, we not only controlled for pretest scores, but for traditional aggression and victimization, and mean-centered age at pretest. In sum, we investigate the expected mean change for participants with average pretest scores in cyberbullying and victimization, traditional aggression and victimization, and mean age. In addition, gender was included as covariate (i.e., when gender is coded 0 = girls and 1 = boy, the mean change is examined for girls, when gender is coded 0 = boys and girls = 1, the mean change examined for boys). In order to study intervention effects, multiple group SEM was applied, where data were split according the group variable so that the expected mean change was calculated for control and intervention group separately. The difference between this mean change between control and intervention group represents the intervention effect. This difference was tested for statistical significance using a Wald parameter test. All statistical analyses were conducted using Mplus Version 7.11 (Muthén & Muthén, Citation1998–2013). Models were estimated using maximum likelihood estimator with robust standard errors (MLR) with -test statistics that are robust to multivariate non-normality. Standard errors were adjusted using a sandwich estimator taking into account non-independence of observations due to hierarchical data structure (students nested in classes). The model fit was assessed by following statistics (see Kline, Citation2010; T. D. Little, Citation2013): the comparative fit index (CFI) with values greater than .90 indicating acceptable fit, and the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) and standardized root mean square residual (SRMR), with values smaller than .08 indicating acceptable fit. Due to the fact that - test is overly sensitive to sample size and is a test of exact fit, which is not a feasible criterion (MacCallum & Austin, Citation2000), the  test was not considered for evaluation of model fit.

RESULTS
Descriptive Statistics
Means and standard deviations of the four main variables for intervention and control group at each time point are presented in Table 3. Correlations between all variables are shown in Table 4.

TABLE 3 Descriptive Statistics for the Main Variables at Pretest and Posttest: Means and Standard Deviations

Download CSVDisplay Table
TABLE 4 Correlation Between All Variables and Stability Coefficients for Cyberbullying and Cyber Victimization

Download CSVDisplay Table
Intervention Effects on Cyberbullying and Cyber Victimization
Intervention effects were investigated based on three models. Model 1 investigates intervention effects controlling for traditional aggression and victimization, but without controlling age. In Model 2 age was included as covariate, and Models 3a and 3b investigate intervention effects for the subgroup of girls (Model 3a) and boys (Model 3b). Figure 2 shows the path diagram for Model 3b without the measurement models. All models showed acceptable model fit (see Table 5).

FIGURE 2 Full bivariate LCS model (Model 3b). Unstandardized parameter estimates for control group/intervention group. Statistically significant results at α = .05 are shown in bold. Insignificant paths are shown as broken lines. Parameter constraints are indicated with @.

FIGURE 2 Full bivariate LCS model (Model 3b). Unstandardized parameter estimates for control group/intervention group. Statistically significant results at α = .05 are shown in bold. Insignificant paths are shown as broken lines. Parameter constraints are indicated with @.
Display full size
In Table 6, the results of the bivariate multiple group LCS model including the estimated mean change of cyberbullying and cyber victimization in the control and intervention group as well as the mean difference between the estimates in the control and intervention group and the effect size latent d (Hancock, Citation2001) are shown. Results of Model 1 including the covariate traditional aggression and victimization indicate that cyberbullying increased in the control group (α = 0.207, p < .01), but decreased in the intervention group (α = −0.107, p < .01). The mean difference between control and intervention group was statistically significant, p < .001, d = 0.395. Cyber victimization on the other hand did not change between pre- and posttest in the control group (α = 0.064, p = .259), while it decreased in the intervention group (α = −0.135, p < .01). The mean difference between control and intervention group was also statistically significant, p < .01, d = 0.299. The covariate age (Model 2) did not influence the results substantially, only the effect size estimates. As for the intervention effects in the subgroup of girls (Model 3a) and boys (Model 3b), the similar results as in Model 1 and 2 were obtained in the subgroup of boys (d = 0.467) and girls (d = 0.301) for cyberbullying and in the subgroup of girls (d = 0.294) for cyber victimization. However, in the subgroup of boys the Wald parameter test failed statistical significance (p = .061) for cyber victimization indicating no differences in terms of change between control and intervention group.

TABLE 5 Model Fit of the LCS Models

Display Table
TABLE 6 Results of the Bivariate LCS Model: Mean Change of Cyberbullying and Cyber Victimization for Control and Intervention Group

Download CSVDisplay Table
Effects of Covariates on Mean Change of Cyberbullying and Cyber victimization
The results of the effects of the covariates on the mean change of cyberbullying and cyber victimization based on Model 3b are shown in Table 7.

TABLE 7 Results of the Bivariate LCS Model: Regression of Mean Change of Cyberbullying and Cyber Victimization on Pretest Scores, Gender, and Age

Download CSVDisplay Table
The mean change of cyberbullying was related to the pretest score of cyberbullying, to the pretest score of traditional aggression, to gender and to age. More specifically, the higher cyberbullying at pretest, the stronger the decrease in cyberbullying in the intervention group (β = −0.7, p < .001); the higher traditional aggression at pretest, the stronger the increase in cyberbullying in the control group (β = 0.231, p < .05) and intervention group (β = 0.124, p < .05). Moreover, girls showed a stronger decrease in cyberbullying than boys in the intervention group (β = −0.055, p < .05), and older participants showed a stronger increase in cyberbullying (β = 0.054, p < .05).

The mean change of cyber victimization was related to the pretest score of cyber victimization and to gender. More specifically, the higher cyber victimization at pretest, the stronger the decrease in cyber victimization in the control group (β = −0.549, p < .01) and intervention group (β = −0.640, p < .001). In addition, girls showed a stronger decrease in cyber victimization than boys in the intervention group (β = −0.057, p < .05). As for the difference in the effect of covariates between control and intervention group, no statistically significant differences were found.

DISCUSSION
Given the high prevalence rates and manifold negative psychosocial consequences for cyberbullying and cyber victimization, doubtless there is a need for high quality prevention programs. However, only few general antibullying programs have been evaluated regarding their effectiveness on cyberbullying and cyber victimization (e.g., Salmivalli, Kärnä, Proskiparta, Citation2011; Williford et al., Citation2013). The present study enjoyed a high methodological standard (e.g., a randomized control design, multiple missing data imputation, rigorous tests of measurement models, and the application of SEM models) to take advantage of measurement error-free latent comparisons. The study was conducted (a) to test the effectiveness of a general antibullying program over one year regarding the reduction of cyberbullying and cyber victimization controlling for traditional aggression and traditional victimization; (b) to test the effectiveness of the program controlling for age and gender; and (c) to explore whether changes in cyberbullying and cyber victimization are related to pretest scores of cyberbullying, cyber victimization, traditional aggression, traditional victimization, gender, and age.

Intervention Effects on Cyberbullying and Cyber Victimization
The ViSC program was effective in preventing cyberbullying and cyber victimization. During one year and controlling for traditional aggression and traditional victimization, the intervention group decreased in cyberbullying and cyber victimization, while the control group increased in cyberbullying and did not change in cyber victimization. This is remarkable, as the program involves no specific elements to prevent cyberbullying and cyber victimization. Thus, it can be assumed, that the ViSC program effectively tackled mechanisms of cyberbullying and cyber victimization, which are similar to those of traditional bullying and traditional victimization. Although the underlying mechanisms of change have to be investigated in future studies, evidence suggest that no specific cyber element is necessary in a general program to also reduce youth’s negative behavior in cyberspace. This is a new knowledge because until now, the few other evaluated general antibullying programs all contained specific cyber elements (e.g., Menesini, Nocentini, & Palladino, Citation2012; Williford et al., Citation2013), some even exclusively targeted cyberbullying (e.g., Ortega-Ruiz, Del Rey, & Casas, Citation2012; Pieschl & Porsch, Citation2013; Schultze-Krumbholz, Zagorscak, Wölfer, & Scheithauer, Citation2014).

Regarding effect sizes, the ViSC program showed high effect sizes with regard to cyberbullying (latent d = 0.395) and cyber victimization (latent d = 0.299), while controlling for traditional bullying and traditional victimization. Compared to other prevention programs, these effect sizes are large and promising (Ttofi & Farrington, Citation2011). These effect sizes might even increase if specific elements to prevent cyberbullying and cyber victimization would be included in the ViSC program.

As a next step, age effects were controlled for, because age effects regarding cyberbullying and cyber victimization are inconclusive, and age is known to moderate the efficacy of antibullying programs (e.g., Smith, Citation2010; Ttofi & Farrington, Citation2011). Even when controlling for age, the effects of the ViSC program were still high regarding cyberbullying (latent d = 0.389) and cyber victimization (latent d = 0.295). This might be due to the small age variability in the present sample and/or the specific age group. Williford et al. (Citation2013) found effects for cyberbullying in the same age group but no effects in a slightly older age group. In any case, more studies regarding the moderating effects of age on cyberbullying and cyber victimization are needed (Smith, Salmivalli, & Cowie, Citation2012).

In subgroup analyses for girls, the program was effective for cyberbullying (latent d = 0.301) and cyber victimization (latent d = 0.294) when additionally controlling for age. In subgroup analyses for boys, the program was effective for cyberbullying (latent d = 0.467), but not for cyber victimization when controlling for age. These gender differences are important to notice and clearly need further investigations.

Effects of Covariates on Mean Change of Cyberbullying and Cyber Victimization in the Intervention Group—Differential Program Effects
To control for pretest scores of traditional aggression and traditional victimization, age and gender is one methodological asset of the present study. Therefore, it was also possible to examine predictors of change over time. Only in the intervention group, the change of cyberbullying was negatively related to the pretest score of cyberbullying. This means, the higher the pretest scores of cyberbullying, the stronger was the decrease in cyberbullying in the intervention group. This is a desirable result, because it indicates that students, who are more involved in cyberbullying at pretest, are especially responsive to the program, while students who are less involved in cyberbullying at pretest are not able to change their behavior to the same degree. In the intervention group, gender was also negatively related to the change of cyberbullying and cyber victimization. This means girls showed a stronger decrease of cyberbullying and cyber victimization over time than boys in the intervention group. Usually, females are more responsive to social stimuli (Proverbio, Zani, & Adorni, Citation2008), which might make them more receptive for social interventions.

Effects of Covariates on Mean Change of Cyberbullying and Cyber victimization in Both Groups—Developmental Effects
Some evidence was found indicating developmental trends regarding the change of cyberbullying. It was important to control for the pretest scores in traditional aggression, as it was positively related to the change of cyberbullying in both the intervention and control group. The more students were involved in traditional aggression at pretest, the steeper the increase, or the more they were involved in cyberbullying over time.

Some evidence was found for developmental predictors in both the intervention and control group regarding the change in cyber victimization. Surprisingly, the more students were involved in cyber victimization at pretest, the steeper the decrease, or the less they were involved in cyber victimization over time.

Interestingly, pretest scores in traditional victimization were unrelated to changes in both cyberbullying and cyber victimization. It seems that only the involvement in traditional aggression triggers the increase of cyberbullying in this age group, which needs to be tackled in prevention programs. If it is possible to reduce traditional bullying by a program, it is likely that cyberbullying rates would also be reduced.

Age was also an important predictor to consider, as it was positively related to the change of cyberbullying, but not to cyber victimization. The older youth were at pretest the more they were involved in cyberbullying over time. This result is in line with the meta-analysis conducted by Kowalski and colleagues (Citation2014) reporting an increase of cyberbullying but not cyber victimization depending on age.

Implications of the Present Study
The present study first of all showed that a general antibullying program is also effective in preventing cyberbullying and cyber victimization. The study also confirms important co-occurrences between cyberbullying, cyber victimization, traditional aggression and traditional victimization already reported in the literature (Kowalski et al., Citation2014). It was shown that traditional aggression is an important risk factor over time, because youth involved in traditional aggression show, despite the positive program effects for reducing cyberbullying, an increase in cyberbullying over time. In contrary, cyber victimization was rather unstable, because youth involved in cyber victimization show, despite the positive program effects for reducing cyber victimization, a decrease in cyber victimization over time (see also Gradinger, Strohmeier, Schiller, et al., Citation2012).

In our interpretation, this study again showed that cyberbullying is “the tip of the iceberg” (Gradinger et al., Citation2009), and consequently whole school approaches are needed to tackle bullying as a systemic problem (Kowalski et al., Citation2014; Swearer & Espelage, Citation2004). Specific cyberbullying prevention programs are certainly valuable; however, the implementation of a holistic whole school approach might have the most return of investment on the long run.

Limitations
The present study was not without limitations, however. First of all, due to the complex model we could not test for gender moderation of program effects. Instead, we analyzed separate models for girls and boys, to get an indication of the importance of this variable. Second, the mechanisms of change, for example, why the ViSC program was able to reduce cyberbullying and cyber victimization, have to be investigated in future studies.

The present study demonstrated that traditional bullying and cyberbullying might share several risk and protective factors or that that students involved in many forms of bullying can be changed by a general antibullying prevention program. Nevertheless, even higher effect sizes of the ViSC program might be achieved when adding specific preventive elements for cyberbullying and cyber victimization including for instance media competence.