The goal of this study was to describe the strength-based bullying prevention program, Strengths in Motion, and to evaluate the program utilizing a mixed-method design. Participants included students in Grades 4 to 8 from an intervention (n = 50) and a comparison (n = 53) school in Northern Ontario. Measures of bullying, strengths, and classroom climate were completed at three time points: One month prior to the start of the program (baseline), and at 3 and 8 months after the program had started. Quantitative analyses revealed that there was a significant decrease in students’ bullying victimization over time, an increase in classroom climate, and students’ personal awareness of their strengths. Semistructured interviews conducted 20 months after the start of the program with various stakeholders, including parents and school staff, complemented these findings and provided additional information on the efficacy of the program and the strength-based approach. Study findings are discussed in terms of the implications for future research.
Bullying is a widespread issue that affects school-aged children and is characterized by repeated physical or verbal aggression performed by a more powerful aggressor towards his or her target (Craig & Pepler, 2003). A recent cross-national study on bullying in 40 different countries found that overall, 26% of adolescents aged 11 to 15 reported involvement in bullying, and within Canada, 23% of boys and 17% of girls reported involvement in bullying (Craig et al., 2009). Children who are bullied may experience low self-concept and depression, while bullying increases the risk of psychological distress (Rigby, 2003), later violence (Rigby, Smith, & Pepler, 2004), and suicidal ideation (Kaltiala-Heino, 1999) for both the aggressor and the child who is being bullied. Given the high prevalence and negative effects of bullying and being bullied, school-based intervention programs have been examined as a means of reducing bullying. However, despite the plethora of bullying programs, few evaluation studies report decreases in bullying as a result of these programs (e.g., Pepler, Craig, O’Connell, Atlas, & Charach, 2004; Rahey & Craig, 2002). Thus, there is a need to develop, implement, and evaluate novel approaches to bullying reduction that meet the needs of school-aged children.
Successful bullying prevention programs have employed a schoolwide approach and engaged individuals at all levels of the school community, including administrators, teachers, parents, and students (Rigby et al., 2004). Participation at each level of the program is important as everyone has a unique role that contributes to the success of the program. An exemplary bullying prevention program using this approach is described by Olweus (1993). The program attempted to reduce bullying by raising the school community’s awareness regarding the incidences of bullying and providing education about the negative consequences associated with bullying. Results indicated that at the end of the school year there was a 50% reduction in self-reported bully problems (Olweus, 1993).
Pepler, Craig, Ziegler, and Charach (1994) evaluated an adaptation of Olweus’ program (1993) among Canadian students. Their program engaged all levels of the school community and created a school environment that no longer tolerated bullying. Furthermore, specific interventions were created that targeted identified bullies and children who were bullied. The results of the initial study revealed that significantly less students reported being bullied in the past 5 days; however, there was also a slight, nonsignificant increase in the number of children who reported bullying others (Pepler et al., 1994). The second evaluation, which involved younger children from three schools, found that self-reports of being bullied decreased across all three schools (Pepler et al., 2004).
Other schoolwide prevention programs have been implemented internationally with varying results (e.g., Peterson & Rigby, 1999; Rahey & Craig, 2002; Stevens, De Bourdeaudhuij, & Van Oost, 2000). Within Canada, Rahey and Craig (2002) conducted a 12-week program that sought to increase awareness about bullying while decreasing incidences of bullying among elementary school children. Results revealed that the program did not significantly reduce incidences of bullying, which the authors hypothesized was due to the program’s short duration. Beran, Tutty, and Steinrath (2004) also noted that program duration was of importance, reporting that longer programs were more effective. Another antibullying program is the schoolwide Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) Program (Walter et al., 2011). This program consists of universal (e.g., teacher strategies for building healthy relationships), indicative (e.g., targeting problematic behaviours), and clinical (e.g., psychiatric assessment) components. At a 1-year follow-up period, researchers found improvements in student mental health problems and social-emotional knowledge, and teacher mental health proficiency (Walter et al., 2011).
Thus, based on the literature, in general, researchers have found that many antibullying programs have limited effectiveness in reducing bullying problems in schools. A recent meta-analytic review of antibullying programs suggested that program ineffectiveness may be related to the fact that complex biological antecedents of bullying behaviour, such as genetics and temperament, may not be responsive to relatively short-term behavioural intervention programs (Ferguson, Miguel, Kilburn, & Sanchez, 2007). As well, the authors suggest that it is possible that bullying behaviours, similar to other violent behaviours, have decreased significantly over the past decade, due to poorly understood reasons, and these “flooring effects” are captured in nonsignificant intervention results.
However, despite the reduced effectiveness of bullying programs, there are some key facets of successful school-based bullying intervention programs that target the whole school. In particular, the components that are most likely to be efficacious in reducing bullying and being bullied include educating teachers about bullying, incorporating programs into the curriculum, encouraging students to seek help if they are being bullied, monitoring students during free time, and formulating interventions targeting bullies and children who are bullied (Olweus, 1993; Rigby et al., 2004; Walter et al., 2010). This multipronged approach is advantageous as it improves classroom climate by emphasizing positive, prosocial behaviours (Garrity, Jens, Porter, Sager, & Short-Camilli, 2000).
Building from these findings and recommendations, the current program, entitled the Strengths in Motion Bullying Prevention Program, was designed to incorporate many of these components. In addition, this program applied a strength-based approach that focused on promoting students’ individual positive attributes or strengths and on fostering a positive climate in the school.
Strength-Based Approach
The strength-based approach seeks to foster individual’s strengths (Duckworth, Steen, & Seligman, 2005), and recognizes that each individual has strengths that may be developed to promote mental health and happiness (Norrish, 2009). The targeted strengths may encompass all facets of an individual’s functioning, such as well-being, optimism about the future, spiritual/religious beliefs, talents/interests, and community involvement (Lyons, Bisnaire, Greenham, & Dods, 2006). Support for the strength-based approach has been found in a variety of programs, such as those designed to strengthen academic performance (Austin, 2005), to prevent psychological disorders (Bromley, Johnson, & Cohen, 2006), to reduce substance use (Tebes et al., 2007), as well as to decrease incidences of bullying and being bullied (Varjas et al., 2009).
Varjas and colleagues (2009) evaluated a bullying intervention program that targeted identified children who were being bullied in Grades 4 and 5. Students participated in support groups that taught coping skills and resiliency based on principles of positive psychology (Varjas et al., 2009). The intervention had a positive effect over time and at posttest the participants reported lower levels of internalizing symptoms as well as increases in positive factors, such as self-esteem and interpersonal relationships. As these factors affect one’s current well-being and have implications for the future (e.g., Haines, Metalsky, Cardamone, & Joiner, 1999), the current program focused on increasing students’ awareness of their personal strengths as well as those pertaining to their goals and dreams for the future. Walter and colleagues (2011) have also shown success with adopting a positive approach, however, a primary focus of their program is on negative behaviours (e.g., mental health indicators, teachers identifying program behaviours among students); we have adopted a strengths-based approach whereby student assets are identified by school staff and students and with less focus on problem behaviours. Furthermore, Donnon (2010) found that adolescents who reported greater levels of developmental strengths were less likely to be the perpetrator and target of bullying. The findings from this study, as well as those from Varjas and colleagues (2009), highlight the benefits of a strength-based perspective.
The Present Study
The current program applied a strength-based approach by providing opportunities for students to highlight their individual strengths both in their classrooms and throughout the entire school. The program developers aspired to reduce incidences of bullying by promoting protective factors, such as positive teacher and peer relationships, and positive classroom climate. Increasing students’ awareness of their strengths was expected to help students cope with challenges that they may face (Jimerson, Sharkey, Nyborg, & Furlong, 2004), feel more motivated and self-confident, and change their problematic behaviours (Terjesen, Jacofsky, Froh, & DiGiuseppe, 2004).
The primary objective of this article is to describe the strength-based program and to evaluate this program utilizing a mixed-methods approach. The rationale for the program was to use a strength-based approach to address the complex needs of students within an inner-city school that had a high proportion of Aboriginal students. It was expected that, as a result of this program, bullying and victimization would decrease, classroom climate would increase, and strengths about one’s personal abilities and goals and dreams for the future would increase over time in the intervention school, in contrast to the comparison school.
Method
Strengths in Motion Bullying Prevention Program
The Strengths in Motion (SIM) program was implemented at a Northern Ontario elementary (intervention) school serving approximately 265 children in kindergarten through Grade 8. As previous reports have indicated that incidences of bullying peak around 11 to 15 years of age (Olweus, 1993), this program was designed for students in elementary school to reduce current bullying and prevent further incidences of bullying. There were several components of the SIM program, each focusing on strengths; one of the major components was to integrate a strength-based approach into the general curriculum for the entire school (Grades 1 through 8).
To carry out the many components of the program, a school resource room was used to implement four main aspects of the program that emphasized the strengths of students.
Good Start Centre: As the program-based elementary school had many new students, particularly Aboriginal students transferring to the school from smaller communities in the surrounding area, it was deemed important to create a welcoming and positive environment in which the new students could be supported. To facilitate this, the resource room was used as a “Good Start Centre.” Students and their families who were new to the school came to the Centre for two, half-day orientation sessions that included a strengths assessment. This involved assessing a child’s strengths using the Strength Assessment Inventory (Rawana & Brownlee, 2010) and subsequently using these strengths to help integrate the student into the school community. By providing new students with a “good start” at their new school, it was intended that this would facilitate emotional, social, and academic success, which would prevent students from being the perpetrator or target of bullying. Staff in the Good Start Room varied depending on its purpose at the time, including school administrators, guidance staff, and community-based mental health professionals.
Cool Down & Prevention Room: Students who were experiencing emotional or behavioural difficulties could come to the room on the advice of their teacher or an administrator to prevent potential behavioural problems that could lead to bullying or being the target of bullying. An administrator would then engage the child in discussions related to their strengths and behavioural choices and would encourage them to use their strengths.
Good Choices Room: Students could also be mandated to spend a specified amount of days in the Good Choices Room as an alternative to suspension. Rather than being excluded from the school and sent home as a consequence for behaviours warranting suspension, students would instead attend the Good Choices Room to work on social skills and participate in talking or healing circles.
Ambassador’s Club: The Good Choices Room was also used to hold meetings of a club involving students who were at high risk for perpetrating or being the target of bullying as identified by the school administration. These students met biweekly with administrators over lunch to build social and problem solving skills, organize activities for the school, and discuss how to improve school situations to make their school experience more positive. It was intended that by continually reinforcing the strengths of these high-risk children, they would be less likely to engage in negative activities, including those pertaining to bullying.
In addition to the resource room components, the SIM program also funded and facilitated intermittent student and parent workshops provided by a local children’s mental health centre, which provided in-school opportunities for mental health service delivery in a group format. These workshops focused on a wide range of topics including grief, trauma, bullying, First Nations teachings, role models, development of goals and dreams, and positive coping skills. The goal of these workshops was to promote involvement of the local community. The combination of these components serves the intent of the SIM program to build sustainability, promote cultural change within the school, and develop pathways between school and community stakeholders.
Finally, school staff was offered professional development workshops on the SIM Program that consisted of educating teachers about identifying and fostering student’s strengths, identifying and intervening when bullying issues arise, and encouraging students to seek help if they are being bullied.
Procedure
Parents and guardians of children in Grades 4 to 8 at the intervention school were invited to have their children participate in the current study. Although the program involved the whole school, participation was limited to those grades as the self-report measures required a Grade 4 reading level. Students were also recruited from another elementary school to act as a comparison school, where no formalized intervention program was occurring. This school was determined to have a similar demographic makeup to the population as the intervention school. Participating students completed measures during the regular school day at three time points. The first data collection occurred 1 month prior to the start of the SIM program at the intervention school. A second data collection occurred 4 months later (i.e., 3 months after the program had been implemented) to ascertain the initial effects of the program and inform the intervention itself, so as to best meet the needs of the students. Data were collected again after the program had been implemented in the school for 8 months. Interviews were conducted with select staff, an administrator, and parents 20 months after the program’s initiation. These interviews were audio-recorded and then analyzed using a grounded theory approach to identify the common themes that emerged between the two groups.
Participants
Participants included a convenience sample of children in Grades 4 to 8 from two different Northwestern Ontario elementary schools: the intervention and comparison school. Of the 352 potential participants within the two schools, parental consent and student assent was obtained for 103 participants (29% response rate). Fifty children from the intervention school (M age = 11.04, SD = 1.34, 58.0% girls) and 53 children from the comparison school (M age = 11.53, SD = 1.42, 45.5% girls) completed the questionnaires. The attrition rate was 5.8% from Time 1 (T1) to Time 2 (T2) and 7.2% from T2 to Time 3 (T3). A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) revealed no significant differences of gender, age, bullying, being bullied (victimization), or bullying witnessed across schools on those who dropped out after T1. Attrition rates from T1 to T2 were hypothesized to be due to students’ high absenteeism. In addition, it is likely that the slightly higher attrition rate between T2 and T3 is due to the fact that these two time points occurred during different school years and students who dropped out had likely moved to a different school. Of the total 103 participants who completed the questionnaires at T1, 15 participants were in Grade 4 (14.6%), 21 in Grade 5 (20.4%), 28 in Grade 6 (27.2%), 24 in Grade 7 (23.3%), and 15 in Grade 11 (14.6%). Forty-four participants identified their ethnicity as White (42.7%), 32 as Aboriginal (31%), 16 as mixed (15.5%), 2 as Asian Canadian (1.9%), and 8 as “Other” (7.7%). Twenty months after the initiation of the program, follow-up interviews were conducted with school staff and an administrator (n = 5) as well as parents (n = 4) to evaluate the SIM program.
Measures
The Safe School Survey (Totten, Quigley, & Morgan, 2004) was used to assess students’ experiences of (a) bullying, (b) being the target of bullying, and (c) attitudes towards bullying. This survey is composed of 47 items that assess broad aspects of safe schools, and for the purpose of this study, the bullying items were used. On this measure, students were asked to indicate how often they experienced bullying-related incidences during the present school year on a 4-point Likert-type scale that ranged from 1 (never) to 4 (many times a week). In addition, other questions (e.g., “I am bullied at school”) required that students respond on a 5-point Likert-type scale that ranged from 1 (not at all true) to 5 (definitely true).
Participants completed the Strengths Assessment Inventory (SAI; Rawana & Brownlee, 2010). The SAI is a self-report measure that evaluates emotional problems, self-concept, and self-perceived strengths. Participant responses vary from 1 (not at all) to 3 (almost always) with high scores reflecting positive strengths. The SAI has good convergent and divergent validity, and internal consistency (Rawana & Brownlee, 2010). For the present study, the strengths from knowing oneself and strengths about goals and dreams subscales were utilized. Cronbach’s alphas were consistent across the three time points and between each school for strengths from knowing oneself and goals and dreams (α = .89 and .86, respectively).
The Classroom Climate subscale of the Diversity, Individual Development, and Differentiation survey (DIDDs; Lupart, Whitley, Odishaw, & McDonald, 2008) was also administered. This subscale is composed of seven items that evaluate the students’ opportunities to participate in their classroom and their perceptions of the support given to them by their teacher (e.g., item “My teacher wants me to do my best”). Items are ranked on a 5-point scale ranging from 1 (false) to 5 (true) with high scores reflecting positive school climate. In the present study, the Cronbach’s alpha averaged .72 across the three time points.
Finally, open-ended, semistructured interviews ranging from 15 to 30 minutes were conducted to understand how the stakeholders perceived the overall effectiveness of the program and utility of the strength-based approach.
Quantitative and Qualitative Analyses
Both quantitative and qualitative analyses were conducted to evaluate the SIM program. An ANOVA was also conducted to ensure that the two schools were equivalent at T1 on scores of bullying and victimization. Descriptive statistics for each of the variables of interest at T1, T2, and T3 were calculated separately for the intervention and comparison schools across all three time points (see Table 1). A series of repeated measures multivariate ANOVAs were conducted using school (two levels) as the between-group variable, and time (three levels) as the within-group variable, to examine the impact of the program on constructs related to bullying (i.e., bullying that an individual was involved in, was victim to, or witnessed), classroom climate, and strengths (i.e., awareness of personal strengths and strengths about goals and dreams). A significance level of .05 was utilized for all comparisons. When appropriate, pairwise comparisons, subjected to Bonferroni corrections to protect against Type 1 error, were used to determine where the significant difference existed among the three groups. Responses to the open-ended questions asked of the participants were coded to determine prominent themes following Patton’s (2001) content analysis procedure, which is designed to capture the elements consistently evident throughout responses to the open-ended questions.
Table 1. Means (SD) of the Dependent Variables for the Intervention and Comparison Schools at Times 1, 2, and 3
Measures	Time 1 M (SD)	Time 2 M (SD)	Time 3 M (SD)
Bullying
 Intervention	2.69 (1.20)	2.87 (1.24)	2.50 (.98)
 Comparison	2.33 (.65)	2.21 (.54)	2.40 (.91)
Victimization
 Intervention	3.56 (1.90)	3.13 (1.47)	2.85 (1.40)
 Comparison	3.28 (1.60)	3.22 (1.87)	2.90 (1.40)
Bullying witnessed
 Intervention	4.80 (2.20)	4.44 (2.16)	3.95 (1.30)
 Comparison	4.70 (2.10)	4.45 (2.23)	4.90 (2.21)
Classroom climate
 Intervention	4.64 (.49)	4.30 (.75)	4.60 (.60)
 Comparison	4.47 (.59)	4.57 (.50)	4.48 (.51)
Strengths: Knowing oneself
 Intervention	45.10 (7.20)	43.54 (7.10)	47.54 (6.21)
 Comparison	45.90 (6.32)	46.73 (6.54)	47.14 (5.73)
Strengths: Goals & dreams
 Intervention	18.11 (2.77)	17.70 (2.92)	18.80 (2.75)
 Comparison	18.90 (2.71)	18.74 (3.03)	19.30 (2.42)
Note: The standard deviation is shown in brackets.
Results
The results indicated that the two schools were equivalent on levels of bullying and victimization at T1, making it possible to conduct a series of repeated-measures MANOVAs to determine the effects of the program.
Perpetrating Bullying, Victimization, and Bullying Witnessed
The results of the Wilk’s lambda multivariate tests revealed a significant between-subjects main effect of school, Wilk’s Λ = .89, F(3, 78) = 3.20, p = .03, partial η2 = .11, and a significant within-subjects main effect of time, Wilk’s Λ = .85, F(6, 75) = 2.30, p = .05, partial η2 = .15. However, there was not a significant school by time interaction (p = .50). Subsequently, when the main effect of school was further investigated for all three time points combined, the results revealed significant differences for levels of bullying others (p = .01), with the intervention school reporting higher levels of bullying than the comparison school. On further exploring the significant main effect of time, the univariate tests revealed that only levels of victimization significantly contributed to the main effect (p = .001). For both schools combined, the mean victimization level at T3 was significantly lower than the mean score at T1 (p = .003) or T2 (p = .01; see Table 1); however, there was not a significant difference between the schools at T3 (p = .79).
Classroom Climate
There was no significant main effect of time (p = .19) or group (p = .68) for levels of classroom climate. However, there was a significant group by time interaction for scores on classroom climate, F(2, 79) = 6.30, p = .003, partial η2 = .14, which indicated that the differences in means for classroom climate between the two schools varied across time. Post hoc tests showed that the comparison group reported significantly higher levels of classroom climate at T2 (p = .025; see Figure 1); however, this trend was reversed at T3 as the intervention school reported higher levels of classroom climate than the comparison group.

Figure 1. Mean Classroom Climate scores at Times 1, 2, and 3 for participants at the intervention and comparison schools
Strengths
The results of the Wilk’s lambda multivariate tests revealed a nonsignificant main effect of the within subjects factor, time (p = .08) and school (p = .20); however, there was a significant time by school interaction, Wilk’s Λ = .86, F(4, 79) = 3.30, p = .02, partial η2 = .14, that indicated that the differences in means for strengths between the two schools varied across time. An examination of the univariate tests revealed that the interaction was only significant for personal strengths, p = .04. Pairwise comparisons showed that the comparison group reported significantly higher levels of personal strengths at T2 (p = .024; see Figure 2); however, this trend was reversed at T3 as the intervention school reported higher levels of personal strengths than the comparison school.

Figure 2. Mean Strengths From Knowing Oneself scores at Times 1, 2, and 3 for participants at the intervention and comparison schools
Staff and Administration Interview Data
With regard to the overall effectiveness of the program, one theme that arose from the interviews with the administrator and staff was a perceived reduction in bullying as noted by 80% of the participants. This was attributed to the belief that the program had made students more knowledgeable about bullying and more comfortable talking about bullying with the staff. Another theme that emerged was school safety, as all participants (100%) reported that the program had made the school safer.
Regarding the overall impact of the strength-based perspective, the first theme that emerged was an increased awareness of strengths. The majority of participants reported that the program had successfully increased the students’ awareness of their strengths (80%), while also increasing the staffs’ awareness of the children’s strengths (80%). For example, one participant reported that “being more aware of one’s strengths and the strengths of others is definitely a positive thing.” A second theme that emerged was the relation between strengths and involvement in school and community activities. More specifically, the administrator and staff reported that as students increased awareness of their strengths, they became more involved in school (60%) and community (60%) activities. In addition, the administrator and staff (60%) reported that the students’ level of Aboriginal traditional knowledge had increased as a result of this approach. For example, it was reported that “students are now taking part in pow wows and there is a drumming group of children who participate in community events [and it has] definitely made them more active in the community.” Another theme that emerged was that the program had given the school community a common language. It was reported that emphasizing student strengths had been used prior to the program’s implementation, but 80% of participants reported that “this program has given staff the vocabulary” to openly discuss and identify the strengths of students. The final theme that emerged was that of academic achievement. It was reported that focusing on strengths increased students’ level of attention and focus in the classrooms. In addition, 60% of participants believed that there was an indirect link to improved educational outcomes: “If you’re not constantly worrying about being bullied or being harassed then you would be less stressed and able to focus more on your learning.”
Parent Interview Data
Findings from the parent interviews complemented those from the administrator and staff. Each of the parents who were interviewed stated that the program led to a reduction in bullying (100%) and an increase in school safety (50%). Furthermore, as a result of the program parents stated that their children learned to better articulate their feelings about bullying. For example, one parent reported, “[My child] has been improving and now understands not to bully because it hurts people.”
Regarding the overall effectiveness of the strength-based approach, parents recognized that the program increased students’ awareness of their strengths (100%). In addition, parents reported that their children became more involved in school (100%) and community activities (75%) as a result of the program, which in turn increased their children’s awareness of Aboriginal traditions (75%). Some statements that were made by the parents indicated that the approach resulted in their child becoming “more confident” and “more involved with extra activities, such as gym.” In addition, 75% of the parents reported that they themselves had become more involved in the school as a result of the program. Finally, parents highlighted that the program improved their children’s academic performance (100%).
Discussion
In summary, this study aimed to develop, implement, and evaluate a strength-based bullying prevention approach for elementary school students. The findings indicated that the intervention did not result in a decrease in bullying over time; in fact, there was a slight increase in bullying from T1 to T3. However, there was a significant decrease in levels of victimization over time. These results are consistent with findings from other evaluations of bullying prevention programs, which found increases or no changes in bullying behaviours. For example Pepler and colleagues (1994) found a slight increase in bullying behaviours paired with a significant decrease in victimization.
Interestingly, for the intervention school, reports of bullying and victimization, classroom climate, and strengths initially dropped from T1 to T2 and then increased again between T2 and T3. In other words, these factors seemed to get worse before they got better. These findings are consistent with previous research (Beran et al., 2004; Rahey & Craig, 2002) that found programs of shorter duration did not positively influence bullying constructs and provides support that longer programs are needed to have an impact.
Over the duration of the study, classroom climate and strengths varied as a function of the intervention. Results indicated that the intervention school reported a more positive classroom climate than the comparison school at T3, but classroom climate was slightly lower for the intervention school at T3 than it was T1. As anticipated, there was a significant time by school interaction for strengths with the intervention school reporting higher levels of strengths than the comparison school. However, this difference was only significant for strengths from knowing oneself. The effect sizes for these significant results ranged from modest to moderate, which further supports the meaningfulness of these findings. These results indicate that the program was successful at making students more aware of their personal strengths. Alternatively, it is possible that students were more aware of the goals of the program and, therefore, were more likely to report on their strengths.
The results of the qualitative component illustrated that the SIM program had a positive impact on bullying prevention and other aspects of school functioning. Reports indicated that the program made the school a safer place by contributing to students being more knowledgeable about bullying and how to cope with it. The various stakeholders reported that the program increased students’ awareness of their own strengths as well as the strengths of their peers, which led children to become more involved in activities at the school and in the community.
Limitations and Future Directions
The main limitation of the current study is the small sample size, which can be attributed to the low response rate. Written parental consent was required, and it has been found to reduce consent rates, which typically range from 40% to 67% (Esbensen, Miller, Taylor, He, & Freng, 1999). Furthermore, school-prevention studies involving multicultural youth are believed to have greater difficulties obtaining parental consent due to language and cultural barriers that may exist between the parents and the researchers (Rodríguez, Rodríguez, & Davis, 2006). Future researchers should aspire to work more closely with schools to increase response rate, and researchers should consider offering incentives for participation, which may boost consent rates. The smaller sample size resulted in insufficient power that may have prohibited the detection of significant findings. While power of greater than .80 is typically required to detect effects (Murphy & Myors, 2004), the power in the current study ranged from .10 to .89 and equations that had lower power were not significant. Therefore, future research should attempt to carry out an evaluation of the SIM program with a larger sample size.
In addition, the results of this study may have been subject to the Hawthorne effect, in that students and parents who were in favour of the program were more likely to support it, which may partially account for the positive findings, such as improvements in academic functioning. Furthermore, this study is limited in that the schools were not randomly selected and efforts to prevent or intervene when children were bullying and/or being bullied was not controlled for within the comparison school. Therefore, it is possible that the comparison school had a supportive staff that intervened when bullying occurred and, in doing so, resulted in lower levels of children being bullied. Thus, future research should attempt to replicate these findings within other schools with different ethnicity groupings and located in different geographic locations.
While quantitative results provided modest support for the program, qualitative findings provided strong support, revealing that the SIM program had a positive impact on the students as well as the various stakeholders of the school. This investigation was strengthened by the inclusion of a comparison group, which allowed for direct comparisons between those who were, and were not, exposed to the SIM program. An additional strength was the mixed-methods design, as quantitative data were collected at three time points and quantitative interviews were conducted at the end of the investigation. Furthermore, the SIM program was designed to be a sustainable, curriculum-based program that is still continuing within the intervention school today. The continuity of the program will allow for continuous bullying prevention and strengths building and will also provide an opportunity to examine more long-term effects of the program. It may thus be possible to follow-up with students from the intervention school as they enter high school.
Implications for Stakeholders
The research team noted additional strategies and “lessons learned” that may be helpful for educators, program developers, and researchers interested in utilizing a strength-based perspective. For educators, a strength-based perspective was critical to engaging partners. For example, the successful implementation and sustainability of the program can be partially attributed to the community mental health partners and investment in promoting the strengths of the student. In addition to the program components described above, school staff was encouraged to leverage student’s strengths in their academic and behavioural management strategies. For example, to facilitate academic skills, students were encouraged to write about their strengths and highlight their strengths for others to see via bulletin boards.
For program developers, the strength-based perspective was useful to engage community partners in collaborative relationships, as it aligns with health promotion programs and emphasizes developing skills that contribute to preventing mental health and relationship/bullying issues. In addition, the program’s individualized and locally developed nature may be of interest to both educators and program developers. The various components offered in the resource room provided both prevention and intervention opportunities for students who were identified as being at risk for involvement in bullying. While all students had access to these services, their involvement was determined based on their needs. As well, the components reflected the needs of the student population as a whole, which was evidenced by the integration of elements of Aboriginal culture. Allowing flexibility for tailoring of interventions to align with the particular population and the ongoing and ever-changing needs of students is key to promoting positive change and reducing bullying and victimization. Finally, identifying student strengths at an early age may contribute to preventing bullying, which often peaks around Grades 6 to 8 (Nansel et al., 2001).
For researchers, a strength-based perspective highlights the importance of measuring growth in positive assets such as strengths along with reductions in negative behaviours such as bullying. A key challenge for researchers continues to be achieving common measurement outcomes that meet the needs of stakeholders involved in school-based programs. It is also key that researchers, in partnership with program developers, both implement and evaluate antibullying programs over the long-term as making change in school dynamics, student self-concept, and relationships with peers takes considerable dedication and requires sustained, consistent efforts on the part of all stakeholders.
In conclusion, this is the first known study to date that employed a whole school-based approach to a strength-based bullying prevention program. This study demonstrated that increasing awareness of individual strengths might lead students to become more confident in themselves and more involved in their communities and schools. Future school-based programs aimed at healthy child development should focus on creating awareness about individual strengths to improve intervention success and promote positive well-being.