Effects of the Cyberbullying Prevention Program Media
Heroes (Medienhelden) on Traditional Bullying
Enrique Chaux1
*, Ana Marıa Velasquez  2
, Anja Schultze-Krumbholz3
, and Herbert Scheithauer3
1
Department of Psychology, Universidad de los Andes, Bogota, Colombia  2
Center for Research in Education-CIFE, Universidad de los Andes, Bogota, Colombia  3
Department of Education and Psychology, Freie Universitat Berlin, Berlin, Germany €
..................... .................... ..................... .................... There is considerable debate over whether cyberbullying is just another form of bullying, or whether it is a problem distinct
enough to require specific intervention. One way to explore this issue is to analyze whether programs designed to prevent
traditional bullying help prevent cyberbullying, and whether programs designed to prevent cyberbullying prevent traditional
bullying. The main goal of the current study was to analyze the spillover effects of the cyberbullying prevention program Media
Heroes (Medienhelden) on traditional bullying. Media Heroes promotes empathy, knowledge of risks and consequences, and
strategies that allow bystanders to defend victims from cyberbullying. Mixed ANOVAs were conducted comparing pretest and
post-test (6 months after intervention) measures of 722 students (ages 11–17) assigned to a long (15 sessions) intervention, a short
(1 day) intervention, and a control group. In addition to confirming the previously reported effects on cyberbullying, Media
Heroes was found to reduce traditional bullying. Effects were larger for the long-version of the program than for the short 1-day
version. No effects were found on victimization by either cyberbullying or traditional bullying. Strategies to complement
traditional and cyberbullying prevention efforts are discussed. Aggr. Behav. 42:157–165, 2016. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
..................... .................... ..................... ....................
Keywords: traditional bullying; cyberbullying; program evaluation; school-based prevention; Media Heroes
INTRODUCTION
As cyberbullying became the subject of academic
analyses, a question has been raised about whether it
should be considered as just another form of bullying, or
whether it is a problem with distinctive characteristics
and dynamics. On the one hand, cyberbullying has some
specific characteristics which may differentiate it
qualitatively from traditional bullying (Campbell,
2005; Slonje & Smith, 2008; Suzuki, Asaga, Sourander,
Hoven, & Mandell, 2012; Tokunaga, 2010; Ybarra &
Mitchell, 2004)1
. For instance, due to the physical
distance associated with cyberbullying, it may be more
difficult to generate empathy toward the potential victim.
Also, the option of anonymity could lead to more severe
levels of aggression. From the victim’s point of view, the
experience can seem harsher as offenses are quickly
observed by a much larger audience, are present all day
and every day, and may be perceived as a situation
without escape. On the other hand, several studies have
shown that victims of cyberbullying tend to be victims of
traditional bullying (Katzer, Fetchenhauer, & Belschak,
2009a; Olweus, 2012; Raskauskas & Stoltz, 2007), and
that cyberbullies tend to be traditional bullies (Katzer,
Fetchenhauer & Belschak, 2009b; Li, 2007; Olweus,
2012; Raskauskas & Stoltz, 2007). However, not all
studies have found this co-occurrence between cyberbullying and traditional bullying. In particular, based on
an online survey, Ybarra, Diener-West, and Leaf (2007)
found that only 37% of those who were victimized
electronically during the last month had also been
Contract grant sponsor: European Commission; contract grant number:
JLS/2008/DAP3/AG/1211-30-CE-0311025/00-69 (DAPHNE III).
Conflict of interests: The third and fourth authors were some of the
leaders in the development of the Media Heroes program. The first
author has been involved in the adaptation and replication of the program
in other cultural contexts.
Correspondence to: Enrique Chaux, Department of Psychology,
Universidad de los Andes, Carrera 1 E # 18A-70, Bogota, Colombia.
E-mail: echaux@uniandes.edu.co
Received 24 November 2014; Revised 13 October 2015; Accepted 22
October 2015
DOI: 10.1002/ab.21637
Published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com).
1
We use the term “traditional bullying” instead of the commonly used
term “face-to-face bullying” since traditional bullying includes relational
or indirect aggression, which are usually not face-to-face (Archer &
Coyne, 2005).
AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR
Volume 42, pages 157–165 (2016)
© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
victims of bullying at school. To date, there is still no
agreement on whether cyberbullying is a different entity
from traditional bullying.
Risk factors for cyberbullying and traditional bullying
might be similar. For instance, lack of empathy has been
shown among cyberbullies (Pfetsch, M€uller, & Ittel,
2014; Renati, Berrone, & Zanetti, 2012; SchultzeKrumbholz & Scheithauer, 2009, 2013; Steffgen, K€onig,
Pfetsch, and Melzer, 2011), as well as among traditional
bullies (Chaux, Molano, & Podlesky, 2009; Decety,
Michalska, Akitsuki, & Lahey, 2009; Endresen &
Olweus, 2001). Those showing low levels of empathy
might be at risk for participating in both cyber and
traditional bullying.
Peer dynamics observed in traditional bullying might
also be present in cyberbullying situations. Specifically,
traditional bullying has been shown to occur in a social
context where bystanders are present (Atlas & Pepler,
1998; Craig & Pepler, 1997) and can play different
roles (Salmivalli, Lagerspetz, Bj€orkqvist, Osterman, & €
Kaukiainen, 1996). Peers can contribute to the maintenance or escalation of aggression if they actively
reinforce the bullying or if they remain passive without
intervening (O’Connell, Pepler & Craig, 1999). They
can also stop the bullying when they intervene on behalf
of the victim (Hawkins, Pepler & Craig, 2001). These
same roles seem to be present in cyberbullying situations
and participant roles seem to coincide. For example,
Wachs (2012) found that 59.2% of defenders, 63.4% of
passive bystanders, and 63.6% of assistants of cyberbullying were also defenders, passive bystanders, and
assistants of traditional bullying, respectively.
The debate about whether traditional bullying and
cyberbullying are different phenomena is crucial for
deciding whether the same strategies that have been
shown to be effective in the prevention of traditional
bullying should also be implemented to prevent
cyberbullying, or whether new strategies are needed.
One way to tackle this issue is to test whether
interventions designed to prevent traditional bullying
prevent cyberbullying, and whether interventions designed to prevent cyberbullying prevent traditional
bullying. Williford et al. (2014) tested the former of
these options and found that KiVa, a school-based
program that seeks to prevent traditional bullying,
mainly by promoting empathy and involvement among
observers of bullying situations, was able to reduce
cyberbullying and cybervictimization after a year of
implementation. Garaigordobil and Martınez-Valderrey
(2015) tested the second option and found that
Cyberprogram 2.0, a program designed to prevent
cyberbullying, was able to significantly reduce traditional bullying. The current study seeks to contribute to
this debate by analyzing this latter option, that is,
whether a program designed to prevent cyberbullying
can have an effect on traditional bullying. In particular,
the main goal of the study was to identify the effect that
Medienhelden (Media Heroes), a school-based program
designed to prevent cyberbullying, can have on
victimization by traditional bullying (i.e., traditional
victimization) and on traditional bullying perpetration
(i.e., traditional bullying) in schools.
MEDIA HEROES (Medienhelden)
Media Heroes (Medienhelden in German) is a
theoretically based preventive intervention program
developed in Germany for the school context (Schultze-Krumbholz, Zagorscak, Siebenbrock, & Scheithauer,
2012; W€olfer et al., 2014). Based on the Theory of
Planned Behavior (Ajzen, 1991) and on the participant
roles approach to understanding bullying dynamics
(Salmivalli, 2010), Media Heroes seeks to prevent
cyberbullying mainly by promoting empathy, providing
knowledge about definitions, Internet risks and safety,
and legal consequences, and promoting assertive ways for
bystanders to intervene. Two versions of Media Heroes
were developed: (i) a long-version consisting of fifteen
45-min sessions and (ii) a short-version consisting of four
90-min sessions that is supposed to be implemented on a
single day. Activities include role-playing, debates,
analyses of written stories, news and films, cooperative
learning, and student–parent presentations (for more
details see Schultze-Krumbholz et al., 2012; SchultzeKrumbholz, Zagorscak, Siebenbrock & Scheithauer, this
issue; W€olfer et al., 2014). Evaluation of Media Heroes
showed that it contributed to the reduction of cyberbullying perpetration, as well as to increases in empathy,
perspective-taking skills, self-esteem, and subjective
health, especially among those who received the longversion of the program (Schultze-Krumbholz, W€olfer,
J€akel, Zagorscak, & Scheithauer, 2012; W€olfer et al.,
2014 see also Schultze-Krumbholz, this issue).
As mentioned, perpetrators of cyber and traditional
bullying (as well as victims of cyber and traditional
bullying) are sometimes the same individuals. In such
cases, an effect of Media Heroes on traditional bullying
might be due to the fact that they stopped being bullies
(or they were no longer victims) of both types. In other
words, evidence for a spillover effect might be stronger
if Media Heroes also had an effect on those who were
traditional bullies but not cyberbullies (or traditional
victims but not victims of cyberbullying) at the
beginning. Thus, a secondary goal of the study was to
investigate the differentiated effects of Media Heroes on
those who were traditional bullies (traditional victims),
cyberbullies (victims of cyberbullying), both or none,
before the implementation of the program.
Aggr. Behav.
158 Chaux et al.
Two hypotheses, related to the main and secondary
goal of the study, were tested:
(1) Assuming that traditional bullying and cyberbullying are specific cases of a larger problem, it was
predicted that since Media Heroes has been shown to
reduce cyberbullying (W€olfer et al., 2014), it would
also reduce traditional bullying.
(2) These reductions should also be found among those
students who were initially perpetrators of traditional bullying but not of cyberbullying, and among
those who were initially victims of traditional
bullying but not of cyberbullying.
METHODS
The current study is based on a pretest–post-test
quantitative experimental evaluation of the Media
Heroes program in which schools randomly assigned
participating classes to three conditions: long-version,
short-version, and control group.
Participants
Participants of the evaluation of Media Heroes were
1,075 adolescents (mean age 13.36; range 11–17 years;
SD ¼ 1.00) from five schools in Berlin, Germany. Four
(78.4% of students) were academic college preparatory
schools (Gymnasien), and one (21.6% of students) was
a school which offers academic and vocational degrees
(Gesamtschule). These schools were self-selected,
responding to an invitation to participate in the
research project. Schools were located in neighborhoods from a diversity of socio-economic backgrounds
(2 high, 2 middle, and 1 low SES;). Participants were
initially 897 students, but there was attrition of 19.5%
of students from pretest to post-test. Thus, longitudinal
data for the outcome variables was available for 722
students. Sample size was determined by the number of
students who agreed to participate, and whose parents
had signed consent forms, from all the participating
classrooms of the five schools which agreed to
participate. No specific sample size calculation was
conducted. However, the sample size obtained is
consistent with what is needed to detect small to
medium effect sizes according to known effect sizes
usually found in preventive intervention evaluation
studies (e.g., Merrell, Gueldner, Ross, & Isava, 2008;
Wilson, Lipsey, & Derzon, 2003). No significant
differences were found between participating and
nonparticipating students on several variables measured at Time 1 (e.g., cyberbullying; SchultzeKrumbholz, Zagorscak, W€olfer, & Scheithauer,
2014). About half (51.8%) of participants were girls.
Procedure
Participating schools decided whether they would
implement the long- or short-version of the program.
They were asked to randomly select intervened and
control classes. Teachers in control classes were asked
not to implement the program for 12 months, and
received the program materials at the end of such period.
Of the 35 participating classes, 12 received the longintervention, 7 the short-intervention and 16 were
control groups. No particular differences were observed
between schools that chose long- or short-versions.
Participation in the intervention was obligatory, as
part of students’ ethics classes. However, participation
in the evaluation was voluntary. Letters explaining the
study and consent forms were given to the students to
pass on to their parents, and only students who agreed to
participate and who returned their parents’ consents
were allowed to take part in the study. Teachers collected
the consent forms and informed the researchers which
students had received their parents’ permission to
participate. Data about non-participation, collected in
21 of the 35 classes, indicated that 4.8% of students were
not allowed to participate (non-participation ranged
from 0% to 20% in different classes). Pretest measures
were collected before the intervention started (January 2011) and 9 months later (i.e., approximately six
months after the intervention finished, in November/
December 2011). Before the implementation, teachers
received sixteen hours of training (see more details in
Schultze-Krumbholz et al., this issue).
Measures
Students responded the European Cyberbullying
Intervention Project Questionnaire (ECIPQ; Del Rey
et al., 2015), a collection of measures developed as part
of the European Cyberbullying Intervention Project, a
collaborative research project funded by the European
Union (see bullyingandcyber.net). Specifically, Traditional Bullying (i.e., Traditional Bullying Perpetration;
a ¼ .80) was measured with seven self-reported items
(e.g., “I spread rumors about someone”). Traditional
Victimization (i.e., Victimization by Traditional Bullying; a ¼ .77) was also measured with seven items (e.g.,
“Someone hit, kicked, or pushed me”). Cyberbullying
(i.e., Cyberbullying Perpetration; a ¼ .88) was measured
with 11 items (e.g., “I said nasty things to someone or
called them names using texts or online messages”).
Cybervictimization (i.e., Victimization by Cyberbullying; a ¼ .70) was also measured with 11 items (e.g.,
“Someone posted embarrassing videos or pictures of me
online”). Response options were “no,” “once or twice,”
“once or twice a month,” “once a week,” and “more than
once a week.” The following global introduction was
Aggr. Behav.
Effects of Media Heroes on Traditional Bullying 159
presented before the questions: “In this section we’re
going to ask you about possible experiences concerning
bullying and cyberbullying in your context of life
(school, friends, people you know ...), both as a victim
of bullying and/ or as a bully. Your answers will be
confidential. Have you experienced any of the following
behavior in the last 2 months?” No specific definitions of
bullying or cyberbullying were provided. del Rey et al.
(2015) present validity information about the measures.
Analytic Plan
Bivariate Pearson’s correlations were initially conducted to explore the relations between the four outcome
variables (cyberbullying, traditional bullying, cybervictimization, and traditional victimization) at the pretest
and post-test.
Given the nested nature of the data (students within
classes), the assumption of independence of observations could be violated. In this case, standard errors
could be biased and therefore need to be corrected, for
example, by means of multilevel modeling. To test
whether this correction was necessary, exploratory
analyses were then conducted to calculate intraclass
correlations (ICC) and design effects. A correction was
considered necessary when design effects exceeded 2
(Muthen & Satorra, 1995).
Results did not show a need to account for the nesting
of the data (described below). Therefore, comparisons of
changes in students’ outcomes as a function of their
experimental condition were analyzed via two-way
interactions in mixed ANOVAs. Two types of analyses
were conducted, corresponding to each of the goals of
the study. To address the main goal, four sets of mixed
ANOVAs were run, one for each outcome: cyberbullying, traditional bullying, cybervictimization, and traditional victimization. Pretest and post-test scores were
included in the analyses as repeated measures and the
experimental condition was included as a fixed factor.
Moderation by sex was examined by including the twoway interaction between sex and time (pretest vs. posttest), and the three-way interaction between sex, time,
and group (control, long- and short-intervention) in
repeated ANOVAs with cyberbullying, traditional
bullying, cybervictimization, and traditional victimization as outcomes.
To respond to the secondary goal of the study, a
second set of mixed ANOVAs replicated the former
ones, but included the initial bullying/victimization
status as an additional factor. Specifically, for bullying,
children were divided into four categories: cyberbully
only (0 in score of traditional bullying, but greater than 0
in score of cyberbullying), traditional bully only (0 in
cyberbullying, but greater than 0 in traditional bullying),
both cyber- and traditional bully (greater than 0 in both),
and nonbully (0 in both). Accordingly, for victimization,
children were divided into: cybervictim only (0 in
traditional victimization, but greater than 0 in cybervictimization), traditional victim only (0 in cybervictimization, but greater than 0 in traditional victimization), both
cyber- and traditional victim (greater than 0 in both), and
nonvictim (0 in both). Cut-off points of zero versus
greater than zero were chosen given the low levels of
traditional bullying and cyberbullying among the
students in the sample. Results were similar when
medians were chosen as the cut-off points. Cut-off points
greater than the medians were not chosen because the
low number in some groups did not permit us to conduct
the moderation analyses. These analyses intended to
differentiate the effects of the program depending on the
students’ initial status.
RESULTS
Bivariate Pearson’s correlations showed significant
correlations between the outcome measures at both the
pretest and posttest (Table I). Correlations were large
(>.6) between cyberbullying and traditional bullying (at
both pretest and post-test), and between cybervictimization and traditional victimization (at post-test).
In order to examine possible baseline differences
between the experimental conditions (long-, short-intervention, and control), one way ANOVAs were conducted
separately for each outcome at pretest. These comparisons
yielded non-significant differences across the three
experimental conditions (for cyberbullying, F(2,883)¼ .45,
P¼ .64; for traditional bullying, F(2,881)¼ 2.35, P¼ .10,
cybervictimization, F(2,889)¼ 2.06, P¼ .13; for and traditional victimization, F(2,890)¼ .77, P¼ .46). These results
confirmed the comparability of the groups across the
conditions.
To explore whether or not it was necessary to account
for the nesting of the data via multilevel analyses, ICCs,
as well as design effects, were calculated for the
outcomes. As children from the three experimental
conditions did not differ in the outcomes’ scores at
pretest, we were able to calculate an index of outcome
change based on difference scores (post-test–pretest).
Then, we examined ICCs for each of the four outcomes:
ICC(Dcyberbullying) ¼ 0.03; ICC(Dtraditional bullying) ¼ 0.04; ICC(Dcybervictimization) ¼ 0.02; and
ICC(Dtraditional victimization ¼ 0.02).
Design effects were estimated based on the following
formula:
1 þ ð Þ average cluster size  1 ICC
Multilevel analysis is considered necessary when the
design effect value is above 2. Taking into consideration
that the average cluster size was 25, all values for the
Aggr. Behav.
160 Chaux et al.
difference scores were found to be below or just on this
threshold (1.76, 2.03, 1.55, and 1.39, for cyberbullying,
traditional bullying, cybervictimization, and traditional
victimization, respectively). Therefore, we ruled out the
need to account for the nesting of the data.
Program Effects
To address the main goal of the study, four sets of
mixed 2  3 (time  condition) ANOVAs were conducted to test for the program effects on each outcome
(see Table II for descriptive statistics). Results showed
statistically significant interactions between time (prestest, posttest) and condition (long-, short-intervention,
control) for cyberbullying (Wilk’s l ¼ .98,
F(2,706) ¼ 6.50, P ¼ .00, h
2 ¼ .02) and for traditional
bullying (Wilk’s l ¼ .99, F(2,706) ¼ 5.37, P ¼ .00,
h
2 ¼ .01). As shown in Table II, pairwise comparisons
indicated that, for cyberbullying, children in the control
group increased significantly in this behavior, while
children in the long intervention showed a significant
decrease (see Fig. 1). In the case of traditional bullying, a
significant decrease was found for the long intervention,
whereas children in the control group and in the short
intervention did not significantly change after the
implementation of the program (see Fig. 2). Analyses
of moderation by sex did not reveal any significant
effects. A tendency (P ¼ 0.057) was found, however, for
a three-way interaction by which changes in cyberbullying according to group (increase in control group, no
changes in short-intervention, and decrease in longintervention) were found for boys, but not for girls.
Program Effects As a Function of Initial Status
In order to examine whether the program had
differential effects depending on the initial status of
children in terms of their level of bullying and
victimization, children were categorized depending on
whether the behavior was observed to any extent. That
is, if children had a score equal to zero, they were treated
as non-bullies or -victims. Conversely, those who had a
score different from zero were thought as being prone to
bullying or victimization. This categorization led to the
following groups and sample sizes: for bullying
perpetration: cyberbully only (N ¼ 34), traditional bully
TABLE I. Pretest and Posttest Correlations Among the Outcome Variables
Cyberbullying Traditional bullying Cybervictimization Traditional victimization
Cyberbullying 0.20 0.63 0.35 0.22
Traditional bullying 0.60 0.41 0.26 0.40
Cybervictimization 0.33 0.38 0.21 0.44
Traditional victimization 0.24 0.53 0.62 0.38
Note. Coefficients above the diagonal correspond to pretest scores. Coefficients below the diagonal correspond to posttest scores. Coefficients on the
diagonal correspond to pretest and posttest correlations.
P < .01.
TABLE II. Pretest and Post-test Scores by Each Experimental Condition, With Pairwise Comparisons Test of Significance
N Mean pretest (SD) Mean postest (SD) Post-test–pretest P Cohen’s d
Cyberbullying
Control 347 0.08 (0.22) 0.14 (0.48) 0.06 .00 .16
Short intervention 135 0.08 (0.18) 0.08 (0.24) 0.00 .95 .00
Long intervention 227 0.10 (0.29) 0.04 (0.11) 0.06 .02 .27
Traditional bullying
Control 348 0.34 (0.45) 0.39 (0.68) 0.05 .10 .09
Short intervention 135 0.29 (0.44) 0.23 (0.45) 0.06 .22 .14
Long intervention 226 0.32 (0.48) 0.21 (0.39) 0.10 .01 .25
Cybervictimization
Control 352 0.09 (0.19) 0.13 (0.33) 0.04 a .15
Short intervention 132 0.11 (0.22) 0.14 (0.30) 0.02 a .11
Long intervention 230 0.09 (0.18) 0.09 (0.19) 0.00 a .00
Traditional victimization
Control 352 0.41 (0.48) 0.38 (0.59) 0.03 a .06
Short intervention 136 0.41 (.56) 0.37 (0.60) 0.04 a .07
Long intervention 230 0.37 (0.52) 0.25 (0.39) 0.11 a .26
Statistically significant difference. a
Pairwise comparisons significance tests were not conducted for these variables, given that no significant interactions were found in the main analyses.
Aggr. Behav.
Effects of Media Heroes on Traditional Bullying 161
only (N ¼ 327), both cyber- and traditional bully
(N ¼ 251), and non-bully (N ¼ 272). For victimization:
cybervictim only (N ¼ 47), traditional victim only
(N ¼ 314), both cyber- and traditional victim
(N ¼ 311), and non-victim (N ¼ 218).
Mixed 2  3  4 (time  condition  initial status)
ANOVAs were conducted for each of the four outcomes.
Three-way interactions were found for traditional
bullying perpetration (Wilk’s l ¼ .98, F(6,697) ¼ 2.11,
P ¼ .04, h
2 ¼ .02) and for traditional victimization
(Wilk’s l ¼ .98, F(6,703) ¼ 2.12, P ¼ .04, h
2 ¼ .02).
Further pairwise comparisons showed that differences
in traditional bullying perpetration could be found
particularly for nonbullies and for children who initially
scored greater than zero in both cyber- and traditional
bullying. In the first case, nonbullies increased their
bullying behavior in the control (mean difference
¼ 0.14, P ¼ .01) and short intervention (mean difference
¼ 0.17, P ¼ .04) conditions, whereas non-bullies in the
long intervention (mean difference ¼ 0.07, P ¼ .21)
condition did not change significantly after the implementation of the program. For children grouped in the
cyber- and traditional bullying category, a significant
decrease in traditional bullying behavior was observed
for the short (mean difference ¼ 0.29, P ¼ .00) and
long (mean difference ¼ 0.32, P ¼ .00) intervention
conditions, while no significant change was observed in
the control group (mean difference ¼ 0.06, P ¼ .24).
That is, in the control group, traditional bullying
increased for those who were initially not bullies of
any kind, and remained for those who were initially
bullies of both kinds. In contrast, in the long-intervention
group, traditional bullying did not increase for those who
initially were not bullies of any kind, and decreased for
those who were already bullies of both kinds.
In the case of traditional victimization, pairwise
comparisons revealed significant differences fortraditional
victims only, cybervictims only, and non-victims. In the
case of traditional victims only, there was a decrease in
traditional victimization for the short (mean difference ¼
0.23, P¼ .01) and long (mean difference¼ 0.15,
P¼ .02) interventions, while the control group (mean
difference ¼ 0.02, P¼ .62) did not change significantly.
For nonvictims, a significant increase was observed for the
control (mean difference¼ 0.13, P¼ .04) and short
intervention (mean difference¼ 0.21, P¼ .03) conditions,
whereas children in the long intervention did not change
significantly (mean difference ¼ 0.07, P¼ .30). Finally, a
non-expected result was found for cybervictims only.
Although children in the control (mean difference ¼ 0.17,
P¼ .19) and long intervention (mean difference¼ 0.07,
P¼ .72) conditions did not change significantly, children
in the short intervention condition showed an increase
(mean difference ¼ 0.82, P¼ .00) in traditional victimization, after the intervention.
Summarizing, in the control group, victimization by
traditional bullying increased among those who were not
victims of any kind of bullying and remained for those
who were already victims of traditional bullying. In
contrast, in the long-intervention (but not in the shortintervention), victimization by traditional bullying did
not increase among those who were not victims of any
kind of bullying and decreased for those who were
already victims of traditional bullying.
DISCUSSION
The results of the current study confirmed that
participating in Media Heroes, a program developed
specifically to prevent cyberbullying, led to a reduction
in traditional bullying perpetration (although not
victimization), in addition to the previously reported
reduction of cyberbullying perpetration (W€olfer et al.,
2014). These effects were found to be greater for the long
version of the program than for its short version. The
positive effects on traditional bullying perpetration were
confirmed for those who initially reported not bullying
(neither cyber nor traditional bullying) as there was a
significant increase in the control group that was not
observed in the long intervention. Furthermore, the
positive effects were also found for those who
simultaneously reported some cyberbullying and some
Fig. 1. Program effects on cyberbullying.
Fig. 2. Program effects on traditional bullying.
Aggr. Behav.
162 Chaux et al.
traditional bullying, but not for those who only reported
some traditional bullying (but no cyberbullying). Thus,
the spillover effect of Media Heroes on traditional
bullying perpetration was partially confirmed.
No significant effects were found on victimization by
either traditional or cyberbullying when the three
conditions (control, short and long-interventions) were
compared. There are some possible reasons to explain
the difference between the effects on perpetration but not
on victimization. First, as cyberbullying is not restricted
to those who share the same classes or schools, students
in the intervention classes might still be victims of
cyberbullying generated by students from classes or
schools (or other individuals) not intervened by the
program. Second, after the intervention, students might
be more aware of cyberbullying being a problematic
behavior. Thus, a possible reduction in instances of
cybervictimization could have been compensated by an
increase in tendency to report cyberbullying if they have
been targeted. Finally, it might take longer to evidence
changes in the perception of being victimized than in
the perception of being a perpetrator because the effects
of aggression (especially relational and cyberbullying)
might continue long after the perpetrators have stopped
behaving aggressively.
Although no significant direct effects were found on
traditional victimization, some interactions were observed when initial levels of victimization were
considered. In particular, positive effects were found
for those who at the beginning were not victims of
cyberbullying but were victims of traditional bullying, as
well as for those who were initially nonvictims (either of
cyber or traditional bullying). In addition, a surprising
increase in the number of students who reported being
victims of traditional bullying was found for those who
participated in the short intervention and who, initially,
had only reported being victim of cyberbullying. A
possible explanation might be that, with the intervention,
they became aware that they were also being victims of
traditional bullying.
In general, the results support the idea that an
intervention designed to prevent cyberbullying can
help prevent students from bullying others in traditional
ways as well. This complements the evidence that KiVa,
a program designed to prevent traditional bullying, can
affect the prevention of cyberbullying (Williford et al.,
2014), and that Cyberprogram 2.0, a cyberbullying
prevention program, can also prevent traditional bullying (Garaigordobil & Martınez-Valderrey, 2015). These
results suggest that traditional bullying and cyberbullying are related sufficiently closely for prevention efforts
for one to have spillover effects on the other. This result
should not be understood, however, as confirmation that
only one of them is needed in the effort to prevent both.
In contrast, it suggests that careful analyses should be
conducted to identify the most effective ways to
complement them. One option could be to focus
prevention efforts on different types of bullying in
different ages. For instance, prevention of traditional
bullying might be more appropriate at elementary grades
where contact with the virtual media is still limited and
where programs like KiVa seem to be more effective
(K€arn€a et al., 2011a,b, 2013). In contrast, prevention of
cyberbullying might be more significant to students in
secondary grades since interactions during adolescence
occur in great part through electronic media. A
cyberbullying prevention program might become an
opportunity to remember, practice, and deepen the
knowledge, attitudes, and socio-emotional competencies
they might have learned in elementary school, and to
apply them in a context that is meaningful to the
challenges facing their adolescent relationships.
There are some limitations to the study that need to be
acknowledged. First, it is based entirely on self-reports
which could be influenced by social desirability.
Although having control groups reduces the risk of
social desirability affecting the results, as the same bias
could be present in the reports from those in the control
groups, it does not eliminate such risk completely
because the intervention itself could have increased the
students’ desire to present themselves as less aggressive.
Although the sample size was large enough to evaluate
the direct effects of the program, the moderation
analyses implied the comparison of many small groups,
limiting its power. The fact that some significant
interactions were found indicates that the effects are
large enough to be observed even with small sample
sizes. Another limitation was that the levels of bullying,
and of cyberbullying in particular, were small at the
pretest. As such, the effects of the intervention could
have been limited because of the limited range for
improvement.
Randomization occurred at the classroom levels, that
is, some classes within the same schools were in the
control group while others received the interventions.
Thus, another limitation is that there could have been
contamination of the effects from the treated classes to
the control classes, implying that the real effects of the
program could have been larger than the observed
effects. Finally, the evaluation was conducted in a
specific urban multicultural context for which Media
Heroes was specifically developed. It is not clear
whether the effects would be the same in other cultural
contexts. In order to investigate this, a replication is
starting in a very different cultural context, with a higher
level of bullying and cyberbullying, and with a larger
sample. This could elucidate the positive effects that a
program such as Media Heroes could have on a global
Aggr. Behav.
Effects of Media Heroes on Traditional Bullying 163
problem such as cyberbullying, and on traditional
bullying as well.
In any case, the results are promising with respect to
the challenge of preventing traditional bullying and
cyberbullying, and suggest that traditional bullying and
cyberbullying may be close enough for interventions to
profit from the synergy when preventing one can help
prevent the other.
