Abstract
The current study evaluated the effects of the culturally adapted Jóvenes Fuertes (Strong Teens ) Social-Emotional Learning (SEL) program on the social-emotional outcomes of Latino English language learners (ELLs). A quasi-experimental design with random assignment by classrooms was used to assess the intervention's effects on students’ knowledge of SEL and resiliency. A sample of 102 Spanish-dominant Latino ELLs enrolled in middle or high school participated in this study. The results indicated significant intervention effects on SEL knowledge and social-emotional resiliency. The findings are discussed in terms of their implications for preventive, culturally responsive SEL programs in school settings.

Best practices for school-based mental health interventions call for the implementation of evidence-based treatments (EBTs). EBTs are defined as interventions that have been developed based on solid theory and have been shown to be effective, in randomized trials, at improving outcomes for participants (Castro, Barrera, & Martinez, 2004). Social-emotional learning (SEL) interventions, many of which are considered EBTs, have become popular in schools in recent years and have shown to be effective at teaching students skills that help them thrive socially, emotionally, and academically (Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki, Taylor, & Schellinger, 2011 ; Jones, Brown, & Aber, 2011 ; Rosenblatt & Elias, 2008). The skills taught in SEL programs include self-awareness, emotion regulation, social awareness, problem solving, and goal setting (Greenberg et al., 2003). These skills have been shown to help students improve their knowledge and application of SEL and their resiliency as well as to decrease their problem behaviors (Merrell, 2010).
Castro-Olivo and Merrell (2012) argued that although SEL interventions can be considered EBTs, more research is needed to determine the validity and effectiveness of these interventions with some of the most at risk and vulnerable school-age populations (Culturally and Linguistically Diverse [CLD] students). Research on SEL interventions has shown that the positive effects of SEL preventive programming are particularly significant for students identified as high risk (Jones et al., 2011 ; Payton et al., 2008) and enrolled in disadvantaged schools (Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group [CPPRG], 2010). Although many of these studies have recruited ethnic minority students (CPPRG, 2010 ; Gunter, Caldarella, Korth, & Young, 2012 ; Jones et al., 2011 ; Rosenblatt & Elias, 2008), it is not clear whether the interventions were culturally appropriate for CLD students and whether any of the participants were ELLs.
Historically, CLD students have performed at significantly lower levels than have their Caucasian peers on state tests and have been found to be more likely to drop out of high school (National Center for Education Statistics [NCES], 2011). They also tend to be overrepresented in juvenile correctional centers (Kempf-Leonard, 2007). Moreover, when compared to their mainstream peers, they are more likely to report lower levels of school belonging (Martinez, Degarmo, & Eddy, 2004) and increased levels of social and emotional problems (Kulis, Marsiglia, & Nieri, 2009). Further, for Latino ELLs in particular, when compared to other Latino groups (U.S. born) they report higher levels of acculturative stress (Albeg, 2010 ; Castro-Olivo, Palardy, Albeg, & Williamson, 2013).
Identifying best practices for serving the needs of at-risk CLD students has become a priority for school-based mental health care providers. A CLD subpopulation of significant interest to such providers is Latino English language learners (ELLs). Latino ELLs have been identified as a fast growing (over 11% of the U.S. school-aged population; NCES, 2011) and high-risk population in terms of both academic and social-emotional issues (Balagna, Young, & Smith, 2013 ; Castro-Olivo, Preciado, Sanford, & Perry, 2011). Of greatest concern is that very few interventions have been developed and validated to support the multiple needs of these students. In this regard, Blanco-Vega, Castro-Olivo, and Merrell (2008) have argued that Latino ELLs are a unique population who can benefit from culturally adapted SEL interventions. Blanco-Vega et al. noted that culturally adapted interventions for adolescent Latino ELLs must explicitly teach them skills to cope with the many sociocultural challenges that they face in U.S. schools and society. Some of these unique sociocultural challenges include language barriers, parents who are unfamiliar with the school system, acculturative stress, familial acculturation gaps, perceived discrimination, and low socioeconomic status (Blanco-Vega et al., 2008 ; Gonzales & Kim, 1997 ; Suarez-Orozco & Suarez-Orozco, 2001). It has been argued that, for Latino ELLs to cope with these challenges, particularly during the already difficult time of adolescence, they will need more sophisticated SEL skills and resiliency than those that are used by mainstream students (Blanco-Vega et al., 2008 ; Castro-Olivo, 2010).
Not knowing whether the SEL interventions that, so far, have claimed to be effective with “at risk and diverse populations” were developed with a culturally responsive lens in mind limits the ability to generalize their findings to all CLD populations (ELLs in particular). Further, CLD populations are considered heterogeneous, and numerous studies have found that CLD students (including ELLs), even within the same schools and communities, do not report similar levels of social and emotional problems and needs. For example, Kulis et al. (2009) found that, in a Latino sample, fifth-grade students who are immigrants and who speak Spanish as their dominant language tend to perceive higher levels of discrimination and acculturative stress than other CLD students. Acculturative stress has been defined as the sociocultural pressures experienced by an individual exposed to two conflicting cultures as he or she attempts to acculturate to the host culture without deserting his or her native culture (Chavez, Moran, Reid, & Lopez, 1997). Similarly, Castro-Olivo, Palardy et al. (2013) found that Latino ELLs enrolled in middle and high schools reported higher levels of acculturative stress than did non-ELL Latinos. Acculturative stress and perceived discrimination have been identified as important considerations for the Latino ELL population, as they can lead to serious social, emotional, behavioral, and academic issues (Blanco-Vega et al., 2008). In addition, Olsen (1997) reported that, besides experiencing higher levels of acculturative stress, Latino ELLs also tend to be segregated from their mainstream school's social networks, which makes the experiences of these students significantly different than those of their mainstream peers. Thus, programs that can help these students cope with feelings of segregation and with the acculturation process would make a significant impact on these students’ lives (Castro-Olivo & Merrell, 2012). For SEL programs to achieve these goals, they will have to teach SEL skills in a culturally relevant manner. Conducting programs in a culturally relevant manner will ensure that the students can relate to the material and use it in their daily life, which has been identified as a main goal of any SEL program (Merrell & Gueldener, 2010).
The need to make programs culturally relevant or responsive has been clearly articulated by the National Association of School Psychologists (2000) and the American Psychological Association (2002). However, there is a paucity of research in applied culturally responsive practice (Forman et al., 2013). A solid body of research already exists in what is often called cultural adaptations of existing evidence-based treatments/interventions (EBT/I). Most of this research, however, has focused mainly on adults. Research on cultural adapted EBTs for adults has shown that such adaptations improve participants’ outcomes, acceptability, and participation rates when compared to nonadapted interventions (Bernal, Jimenez-Chafey, & Domenech-Rodriguez, 2009 ; Castro-Olivo & Merrell, 2012 ; Griner & Smith, 2006 ; Smith, Domenech-Rodriguez, & Bernal, 2011). Researchers have found that individuals who participate in programs that have been adapted to directly address their sociocultural and emotional realities tend to report improved outcomes, higher levels of engagement, and a stronger commitment to the intervention, when compared to those who participated in nonadapted programs (Griner & Smith, 2006 ; Smith et al., 2011). Participants’ engagement and commitment to the intervention have been found to predict the success of any intervention (Connell, Dishion, Yasui, & Kavanagh, 2007). In their meta-analyses, Griner and Smith (2006) and Smith et al. (2011) found that culturally adapted interventions are more effective than are nonadapted interventions at improving outcomes of CLD participants. The need for making cultural adaptations to existing evidence-based programs is supported by Vygotsky's (1962) social-cultural theory, which posits that humans’ overall development is highly influenced by their cultural environments.
However, as previously mentioned, little research has been conducted in the area of culturally adapted EBTs with children and adolescents (Huey & Polo, 2008). In addition, Latino ELLs are rarely represented in this research (Castro-Olivo & Merrell, 2012). Addressing the dearth of research on culturally adapted EBTs for youth should be the main focus of researchers who are interested in developing effective interventions to meet the needs of CLD populations, particularly ELLs.
Study Aims and Research Questions
Given the popularity of SEL interventions in schools, the growing number of Latino ELLs, and the fact that social-emotional resiliency has been identified as a strong protective factor, the current study aims to evaluate (a) the effectiveness of the program in improving social-emotional outcomes (SEL knowledge and resiliency) of Latino ELL students and (b) the social validity of the culturally adapted SEL intervention. The goal of this study was to validate the Jóvenes Fuertes, a culturally adapted SEL intervention (as described in the methods section) with a Latino ELL sample enrolled in middle and high school.
This study was designed to answer the following research questions: (a) To what extent do students who participate in the culturally adapted Jóvenes Fuertes SEL program report higher levels of SEL knowledge and SEL resiliency in comparison to those in the waitlist control group at postintervention assessments? (b) To what extent do participants perceive the culturally adapted Jóvenes Fuertes SEL program as a socially valid intervention?
Method
Participants and Setting
Students
A total of 102 Latino adolescents enrolled in beginning to intermediate English language development (ELD) classes were recruited to participate in this study. The mean age of participants was 13.91 ( SD = 1.86). Over half of the students (59%) reported to have been born in Mexico or another Latin American country. The remainder (41%) reported being born in the United States but living at least 3 years outside of the United States. All students reported that Spanish was their dominant language. Of the participants, 75% were enrolled in middle school, and 25% were enrolled in high school. The mean number of months living in the United States was 38.84 ( SD = 44.01), with 31% having lived in the United States 1 year or less; 20% three years or less, and the remainder (48%) three or more years. Ninety-four percent of the participants reported to be receiving a free or reduced-cost lunch at the time of the intervention. Of the participants, 49% were in classrooms that were randomly assigned to the intervention. In addition, 50% of the participants identified as female and 49% as male. One participant chose not to report his or her gender. Table 1 presents the demographic information.
undefined undefined
Table 1 Sample Baseline Demographic Characteristics by Group
undefined undefined
Table 1 Sample Baseline Demographic Characteristics by Group
Schools
Students were drawn from five middle schools and two high schools from three different districts in Southern California. All students were nested in eight different classrooms (four classrooms were randomly assigned to the intervention and four to the waitlist control). All participating schools were similar in demographics (over 60% of students received a free or reduced-cost lunch, over 50% of students were ethnic minorities, and over 30% of students were ELLs). Six of the seven participating schools only had one class of students in the lower/beginning levels of ELD (I–III), given that, by middle or high school, most students who were born in the United States or who came to the United States as small children already had been reclassified or were in the higher levels of ELD. Recruiting from the lower levels of ELD was important for this study because the intervention to be tested was conducted in Spanish, the students’ dominant language, and focused on the social-emotional needs of students who were acculturating into the U.S. culture.
Teachers/interventionists
Two certified, bilingual, Latina, master's-level teachers served as the interventionists for this study. Given that not all of the participating classrooms had bilingual teachers (some teachers were monolingual English speakers certified to teach ELD), one of the teachers served as the main interventionist for three of the four classes that were assigned to the intervention group. Both interventionists received a 4-hr training in the socioemotional needs of ELL students and the theory behind SEL programs and cultural adaptations as well as an overview of the Jóvenes Fuertes program. Teachers were observed on the delivery of the program and received feedback/consultation by the principal investigator, who is bilingual and bicultural, on a weekly basis. To assess for intervention fidelity, the principal investigator used a checklist to note whether all main goals of the lesson were covered. The feedback and consultation received by the interventionists consisted of weekly meetings with the principal investigator. During these meetings, they went over each of the main agenda items for the upcoming week's lesson, reviewed the previous lesson, and obtained clarification or additional examples to have a better understanding of the content and concepts to be covered in upcoming lessons. Teachers also were provided with ideas on how to manage any potential delivery issue such as difficulty with materials, students’ behavioral problems/disruptions, and/or culture-specific examples.
Measures
Instruments that assessed students’ social-emotional resiliency, knowledge of SEL, and social validity were used to address the research questions, and all measures were available in English and Spanish. Only four of the participants took the measures in English. Measures that did not have a previously validated Spanish version underwent a careful back-translation procedure, whereby the principal investigator performed the first translation and then asked a bilingual research assistant to translate it back into English. An independent bilingual editor was contracted to check the accuracy, quality and consistency of both translations. This procedure was followed for the Behavior Emotional Rating Scale (BERS-2) and the social validity questionnaire, which are described below. The Spanish version of the knowledge test was obtained from researchers who claimed to have followed similar back-translation procedures in their studies. The quality of that translation was checked for the current study.
BERS-2
The BERS-2 is a self-report social-emotional resiliency measure in which students rate their own behavior/feelings on 33 items that concern interpersonal, intrapersonal, and affective strengths. The full BERS scale consists of 57 items and two additional subscales not included in this analysis (school functioning and family strengths). Items are responded to using a 4-point Likert scale ranging from 0 ( not at all like me ) to 3 ( very much like me ). As previously stated, participating students were asked to only complete a shorter version of this scale. Sample items are: “I believe in myself” (Spanish translation [ST]: “Yo tengo fé/creo en mi mismo”); “When my feelings are hurt, I stay calm” (ST: “Cuando mis sentimientos estan lastimados, permanezco calmado”); “I care about how others feel” (ST: “Me importa como se sienten los demas”); and, “I can express my anger in the right way” (ST: “Yo puedo expresar mi enojo de una forma correcta”). The items used for this study yield an alpha coefficient of .90.
Strong Teens Knowledge Test—Spanish Version
This measure was used to assess students’ knowledge of SEL concepts pre- and post-intervention. The test consists of 20 items in true-false and multiple-choice response formats. Sample questions are “When identifying a problem, it is important to describe how you feel and then listen to how the other person says they feel (True or False)” (ST: “Cuando identificas un problema, es importante describir cómo te sientes y después escuchar lo que la otra persona dice que siente [Cierto o Falso]”); “Anger is a natural emotional reaction (True or False)” (ST: “El enojo es una reacción emocional natural [Cierto o Falso]”); and “Which of the following is not a step for dealing with your feelings? (a) determine if you feel comfortable or uncomfortable; (b) identify how you feel; (c) tell your friends how you feel; or (d) choose three positive or appropriate ways to express that feeling” (ST: “Cuál de estos no es uno de los pasos para lidiar con tus sentimientos? (a) determinar si te sientes cómodo o incomodo; (b) identificar como te sientes; (c) decirle a tus amigos cómo te sientes; o (d) escoger tres maneras positivas y apropiadas para expresar ese sentimiento”). The internal consistency reliability for the English version of this scale has been shown to range from the high .50s to the mid .70s and has been shown to be highly sensitive to growth in knowledge of SEL competencies (Merrell, Juskelis, Tran, & Buchanan, 2008). Cronbach's alpha for the current sample ranged from .44 to .56. The low internal consistency for this measure could be explained by the fact that this measure is a comprehensive multiple-choice test that assesses multiple constructs of SEL knowledge. It does not test one construct, per se, and is heavily dependent on exposure to SEL training.
Social validity: Student report
A researcher-developed nine-item scale was used to assess students’ acceptability and satisfaction with the program. The questionnaire uses a 6-point Likert scale ranging from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 6 ( strongly agree ). Students responded to items such as, “I like the Jóvenes Fuertes program” (ST: “Me gusta el programa de Jóvenes Fuertes”); “I am likely to use the skills taught by this program” (ST: “Es muy probable que yo use las habilidades que me enseñaron en este programa”); and “I think this program was created for Latinos like myself” (ST: “Yo creo que este program fue creado para Latinos como yo”). The internal consistency of this measure was .87.
Materials and Procedures
SEL program
The Jóvenes Fuertes program, a validated culturally adapted version of the Strong Teens program (Merrell, Carrizales, Feuerborn, Gueldener, & Tran, 2007) was used as the intervention. The Jóvenes Fuertes program was validated by Castro-Olivo and Merrell (2012) for use with Latino immigrant adolescents in a high school setting. Castro-Olivo and Merrell used the ecology validity model by Bernal, Bonilla, and Bedillo (1995) to validate the program with this population. The ecology validity model requires researchers and practitioners, when adapting an EBT for use with CLD populations, to incorporate the following eight different dimensions: language, persons, metaphors, content, concepts, goals, methods, and context. The culturally adapted version of Strong Teens was translated into Spanish (language) and adapted to be delivered by individuals who are bilingual and bicultural (persons and metaphors). First, Castro-Olivo and Merrell identified the theory-based culturally relevant content and concepts to add to the original program (i.e., a lesson on ethnic pride, explicit examples of how to use problem solving and reframing skills to cope with acculturative stress and familial acculturative gaps). Then they conducted a series of focus groups and consulted a panel of experts to ensure that the adaptations were aligned with the goals and values of the target population and to verify that the planned methods of delivery and context were appropriate. Once this process had been completed, Castro-Olivo and Merrell conducted a prepost pilot study with 40 recent immigrant high school students to assess the preliminary efficacy of the program. Although the results of the pilot study were promising, the small sample size and the lack of a control group limited the ability of the researchers to generalize their findings. The current study builds on this research.
As previously stated, the Jóvenes Fuertes program was chosen due to the promising results of Castro-Olivo and Merrell's (2012) research and the strong empirical evidence that supports the effectiveness of its predecessor ( Strong Teens/Kids ; Castro-Olivo & Merrell, 2012 ; Gunter et al., 2012 ; Harlacher & Merell, 2010 ; Merrell, 2010). The Strong Teens/Kids curriculum is a semiscripted, 12-lesson (one lesson per week), SEL program that teaches students key SEL skills, such as self-awareness, social awareness, empathy, problem solving, anger management, responsible decision making, goal setting, and reframing of destructive thoughts (Merrell et al., 2007). Although the Strong Kids curricula offer a separate manual for middle school- and high school-aged students, according to Merrell (2010), the programs are more similar than different. Both programs follow the same sequence, goals, and lessons. The main differences are:
“language and examples that are used, as well as the cognitive and social sophistication of concepts and required activities. For example, the middle school component includes examples and activities that are designed to be inclusive of the broadening social sphere and autonomy with which children of this age must learn to cope, where areas the high school component is infused with examples, problem scenarios, and language that are consisted with the developmental tasks typical of adolescence: increased autonomy, increased influence of peer group, romantic attraction, work skills and school-career transitions and so forth”. (Merrell, 2010, p. 59)
It is important to note that the Jóvenes Fuertes program was designed to have more similarities than differences for students in Grades 6–12. The main focus of Jóvenes Fuertes is to help students cope with the acculturation process and with life as an ELL. Therefore, all the examples on how to apply SEL skills pertain to ELLs’ daily lives, instead of social situations such as romantic attraction.
Procedures
Once approval of the study had been obtained from the institutional review board of the hosting university and the participating school districts, the principal investigator visited each participating classroom to explain the study to students. All students were asked to return written parental consent forms and student assent forms. Information sessions also were conducted/offered at each school district for parents interested in receiving more information than what was provided on the consent documents. The participation rate varied from 85% to 100% per classroom. Students who opted to not be part of the study were given the choice, by their teachers, to either stay and listen to the lesson (without the expectation that they would fill out any of our measures) or work on an alternative activity. The alternative activities were usually performed outside the classroom, where the nonparticipating students were supervised by a teacher assistant. Once consent and assent were obtained, all participating students filled out the preintervention assessment packet. Postintervention assessments were collected from all participants (those assigned in the intervention or control group) the week after the intervention group concluded the last lesson of the program. At that point, those who had been assigned to the waitlist control group received the intervention. Participating students received a small token (a pencil with the logo of the sponsoring university and/or a piece of candy) as compensation during each assessment period. They also were entered into a raffle for a gift card to a local store. Four gift cards were raffled off per classroom.
Research Design and Analysis Plan
A quasi-experimental intervention/control pre-post research design was used. Classrooms, not students, were randomly assigned to the intervention or control groups. A repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to identify intervention effects. Descriptive statistics and frequencies were used to determine social acceptability/validity.
Results
Program Effectiveness: SEL Outcomes
Descriptive statistics provided the means and standard deviations for participants’ demographics and self-reports of SEL knowledge and resiliency. Table 1 presents a summary of the demographic characteristics of the sample. Table 2 provides a summary of the statistics for the dependent variables. The results of the repeated-measure ANOVAs showed that the students assigned to the intervention group reported significantly higher levels of SEL knowledge, F (1, 81) = 28.93, p < .00 and resiliency, F (1, 68) = 5.828, p < .02. Cohen's d was calculated for both variables, with 1.27 obtained for knowledge ( r = . 53) and .44 for resiliency ( r = .21).
undefined undefined
Table 2 Psychometric and Descriptive of Dependent Variables at Pre and Post by Group
undefined undefined
Table 2 Psychometric and Descriptive of Dependent Variables at Pre and Post by Group
Social Validity/Acceptability
Participating students rated the intervention highly in terms of social validity and acceptability. Table 3 presents the results related to social validity. None of the items received a score of lower than 4.5 on a scale of 1–6. Students reported to have liked the program, believed that it taught them valuable skills, observed positive changes in their peers, and thought that the material was relevant to their ability to improve in school.
undefined undefined
Table 3 Students' Social Validity
undefined undefined
Table 3 Students' Social Validity
Discussion
Latino ELLs have been identified as a at-risk group of students in need of culturally adapted interventions. These interventions are expected to teach them skills that can help them to cope with the sociocultural challenges unique to someone who is learning English and who is alienated from their schools’ mainstream social networks (Blanco-Vega et al., 2008). The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of the Jóvenes Fuertes culturally adapted SEL program at increasing knowledge of SEL and self-reports of SEL resiliency among Latino middle and high school students. Students’ perceptions of how the program was socially valid (acceptable, relevant, and useful) also were assessed. The Jóvenes Fuertes program already had been validated by Castro-Olivo and Merrell (2012); however, their research lacked random assignment and an examination of intervention effects on students’ resiliency and included only a high school sample. The current study, however, evaluated the effects of the culturally adapted SEL intervention on middle school and high school students’ SEL resiliency and knowledge and the social validity of the program. The results showed that the program was effective in improving students’ social-emotional resiliency and knowledge of SEL. Students also reported high levels of social validity.
The results of this study are aligned with those of Castro-Olivo and Merrell (2012). These findings are important because they demonstrate that even a short intervention (12-lesson program) is effective in improving ELL students’ social-emotional knowledge and resiliency in ways that are acceptable and valid for them. Social-emotional resiliency has been found to serve as a protective factor for students at risk for maladaptive behaviors (Castro-Olivo, Tran et al., 2013) and internalizing issues (Whitcomb & Merrell, 2012). Merrell (2010) stated that social-emotional resiliency is also expected to serve as a buffer for students who need to cope with adverse situations. Evaluating the effects of the intervention on resiliency was considered to be an important step, given that a main goal of SEL programs is to ensure that the participating students gain the skills needed to cope with adverse, culturally loaded situations (Blanco-Vega et al., 2008). The fact that the students who participated in the intervention group reported higher levels of resiliency at postintervention compared to those students in the control group indicates that the program provided students with valuable skills that prepared them to deal with adverse situations in a more proactive manner. It is also important to note that the intervention effects obtained for this intervention met the expected criteria for social-emotional preventative interventions. Although a .20 effect size is usually considered low (Cohen, 1988), it has been determined as acceptable for preventive mental health efforts. It has been argued that teaching these skills to normally developing children (not identified with clinical levels of internalizing issues) produces lower effects than when working with clinical populations. The fact that the intervention still produced statistically significant results should be viewed as an important gain. (Merrell, 2010).
The high social validity ratings also should be considered as another strength of the Jóvenes Fuertes intervention. The culturally adapted program showed not only that it was effective at improving students’ outcomes but also that students perceived it as culturally responsive. Evaluating participants’ perceptions of social validity has been recommended when developing or implementing interventions that are new and that require some type of behavioral change (Wolf, 1978). Evaluating participants’ perceptions of how well the intervention met their needs and was enjoyable also has been identified as important for interventions that aim to be culturally responsive (Martinez & Eddy, 2005). Obtaining high levels of social validity should be considered an important criterion for a culturally responsive and effective interventions.
Limitations and Future Directions
The study, although making a valuable contribution to the field, has several limitations. One major limitation is that no problem behavior, including acculturative stress, was measured as a means to assess the effectiveness of the intervention on decreasing problem behaviors or symptoms of internalizing problems. SEL interventions have shown to be effective at decreasing both internalizing and externalizing problem behaviors with mainstream samples (Durlak et al., 2011 ; Whitcomb & Merrell, 2012); however, this has not yet been addressed for Latino ELLs. Research on Latino ELLs has shown, however, that culturally adapted SEL programs could at least reduce the progression of acculturative stress (Castro-Olivo & Merrell, 2012).
Although the lack of examination of acculturative stress is a serious limitation for culturally adapted programming aimed at Latino ELLs, previous research suggests that, given the time frame of the current study (3 months between pre- and post-intervention assessments), intervention effects on acculturative stress were not likely to be detected. For example, Tartakovsky (2007), in a study that examined the progression of acculturative stress in recent immigrant adolescents, found that acculturative stress significantly increases over a 1-year period. Castro-Olivo and Merrell (2012) found that their student participants did not report a significant increase in acculturative stress over an 8-month period. Given that the current study used a simple pre–post design, the time needed to accurately assess the intervention's effect on students’ acculturative stress was not available. A longitudinal approach, using a 1- to 2-year time span, is recommended for future research.
In addition, future studies should evaluate the effects and social validity of a culturally adapted intervention versus a nonadapted intervention with ELL students and other CLD samples. Not having a comparison group that obtained a nonadapted intervention limits our ability to say how much more effective culturally adapted interventions are for these populations. At this point, we know that being culturally responsive is important, effective, and socially valid, but more research is needed to determine how much more effective it is when compared to mainstream practices. This type of information will be paramount in the allocation of resources and support for populations in need of additional culturally responsive support. Future research also should examine intervention effects by gender and time lived in the United States. Research has found gender differences in resiliency (Hollister-Wagner, Foshee, & Jackson, 2001) and time lived in the United States (Castro-Olivo et al., 2011); however, the small sample size limited the ability to identify the effects of these variables for the current sample.
Conclusions and Implications for Culturally Responsive School-Based Practices
This study addressed an important gap in the current literature, specifically, SEL interventions have been validated with mainstream populations but not with ELLs. Latino ELLs have been identified as a unique group of students at risk for social-emotional and academic problems. Researchers have argued that their risk can be ameliorated through the development of SEL skills that explicitly help them to cope with the many sociocultural challenges that they face in U.S. schools and society (Blanco-Vega et al., 2008 ; Castro-Olivo & Merrell, 2012). Social-emotional resiliency has been theorized to serve as a buffer for these students; therefore, interventions that effectively teach them these skills in a culturally responsive manner are highly needed. The current study showed that Jóvenes Fuertes , a previously validated, culturally adapted SEL program, is both effective and socially valid for Latino ELL students enrolled in middle and high schools. School mental health practitioners are encouraged to use this intervention, or the steps summarized by Castro-Olivo and Merrell (2012) for making cultural adaptations of existing EBTs, when working with CLD students, in particular, with ELLs. In addition, these findings have implications for future research on SEL and teacher trainings. Researchers studying the effects of SEL program should also study the effects of teachers’ cultural competency when working with CLD populations.
