EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Introduction
This report presents the main findings on the evaluation of the Zippy’s Friends emotional wellbeing
programme in Irish primary schools. The Zippy’s Friends programme is designed to promote the
emotional wellbeing of children aged five to eight years of age by increasing their repertoire of coping
skills and by stimulating varied and flexible ways of coping with problems of day-to-day life. The
programme is based around a set of six illustrated stories about a group of children, their families,
friends and an imaginary stick insect called Zippy. Comprised of six modules, the programme
addresses the following themes: feelings, communication, making and breaking relationships, conflict
resolution, dealing with change and loss, and general coping skills. Structured into sessions, the
programme is supported by a teacher’s manual and an attractive set of teaching materials, which are
designed to actively engage the children in a range of child-centered activities. Teachers participate in
a structured training programme before implementing the programme in class.
In February 2008, the Zippy’s Friends programme was introduced into Irish designated disadvantaged
primary schools on a pilot basis to support the implementation of the Social Personal and Health
Education (SPHE) curriculum for junior classes. With the support of the Department of Education
and Science and the Health Service Executive, the programme was piloted in 30 designated
disadvantaged (DEIS) schools in the West of Ireland. The 24 week programme was implemented
over two academic years, 12 lessons were implemented between February and June 2008 and the
remaining 12 sessions were implemented between October and March 2009. An evaluation of the
pilot implementation of the programme was undertaken by the Health Promotion Research Centre at
NUI Galway. The evaluation aims to:
• determine if an international evidence-based programme could be adapted and successfully
implemented in the local context of disadvantaged primary schools in Ireland
• assess the impact on the pupils’ emotional and behavioural wellbeing and coping skills
• examine the process of implementation and the relationship between this process and the
programme outcomes.
Methods
The study employs a randomised controlled design with data collection from teachers and pupils
before, during and after the implementation of the programme. A total of 730 pupils (mean age = 7
years 3 months; gender = 47.7% female) and 42 teachers from 42 DEIS schools in Donegal, Sligo,
Leitrim and Galway were randomly assigned to intervention (N = 523) and control groups (N=207).
4 Evaluation of Zippy’s Friends in Ireland
The intervention group was further divided into two types – Intervention Type I (N=270) and
Intervention Type II (N=253). The teachers in Intervention Type I were asked to implement the
programme as faithfully as possible. The teachers in Intervention Type II were requested to use the
programme as a resource and they could, therefore, decide which parts of the programme they would
implement. The control schools received the standard SPHE class (30 min per week). The evaluation
is comprised of a range of quantitative and qualitative methods designed to assess the process of
programme implementation and the programme effects on the children and teachers. The teachers
completed questionnaires on a weekly basis throughout the implementation of the programme in
addition to taking part in focus group review sessions. The children also completed a questionnaire,
along with taking part in the Draw and Write Activity and participatory workshops.
The following measures were employed:
Programme effects
• Children’s Emotional Literacy
– Emotional Literacy Checklist
• Children’s Coping Skills
– Schoolagers’ Coping Strategy Inventory
– Draw and Write Technique
– Children’s Participatory Workshops
• Children’s Emotional and Behavioural Wellbeing
– Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
Programme implementation
• Programme Fidelity
• Teachers’ Weekly Reports on Programme Implementation
• Perceived Strengths and Weaknesses of the Programme
– Children’s Participatory Workshop
– Teachers’ Review Questionnaire and Focus Group Interviews
• The School Context – Ethos Questionnaire
• The School Context – Social Personal and Health Education Questionnaire
Key Findings on Adapting the Programme to Primary
Schools in Ireland
• There were no difficulties experienced in adapting the programme to the Irish school setting.
The Zippy’s Friends programme fitted well in the context of SPHE for primary schools and
supported the delivery of a number of strand units of the curriculum. The findings from the
evaluation suggest that the programme was well received by teachers and pupils and that little or
no adaptation was required. Throughout the implementation of the programme the commitment
of the teachers and the support of the local health promotion staff were found to be critical to the
successful implementation of the programme.
Health Promotion Research Centre, NUI Galway. 5
Key Findings on Programme Effects
• Children’s emotional literacy: The evaluation results indicate that the Zippy’s Friends
programme had an overall significant positive effect on the children’s emotional literacy skills, with
significant improvements in the children’s self-awareness, self-regulation, motivation, empathy
and social skills when compared with the control group. The results from the teachers’ end of
programme evaluation further support these positive findings with the majority of teachers (over
90%) observing improvements in the children’s social skills, verbal communication skills, their
ability to manage their feelings and their relationships with each other. The findings from the
children’s participatory workshops also show that the children in the intervention group had a
more elaborate and wider range of vocabulary for articulating their feelings after completing the
programme. They were more likely than the control group to explain the reasons why people felt a
certain way and to suggest what they could do to make the situation better. The qualitative findings
from the children’s participatory workshop also indicate that there was a significant improvement
in the intervention group’s emotional literacy when compared with the control group.
• Children’s coping skills: In relation to the impact of the programme on the children’s coping
skills, few significant changes emerged from the Schoolagers’ Coping Strategy Inventory apart
from the finding that the children in the intervention group were more likely to rate stress-coping
strategies such as trying to relax and stay calm as being more effective following completion of the
programme. The results from the Draw and Write Activity indicate that there was an increase in
the use of problem focused coping strategies among the intervention group and that the coping
strategies used were aimed at directly addressing the problem. There was no significant change
in the type of coping strategies used by the control group at post-intervention. Results from
the participatory workshops also indicate that the children who completed the Zippy’s Friends
programme expressed a wider repertoire of coping strategies when compared with the control
group.
• Children’s emotional and behavioural functioning: The results from the Strengths and
Difficulties Questionnaire show that both the intervention and control groups’ total difficulties
scores decreased over time, however, no significant programme effect was found. Examination
of the subscale scores did reveal that post-intervention there was a significant decrease in the
hyperactivity levels of the children in the intervention group when compared with the control
group.
• Effects on the teachers and their relationships with the children: Following completion of
the programme the teachers reported that the programme had a positive effect on themselves in
terms of raising their awareness about the children’s emotional wellbeing, providing them with
strategies to help the children deal with difficult situations, and enhancing their relationship with
the children.
• Effects on the school and the wider community: The majority of the teachers indicated that
there was a lack of ‘whole school’ awareness about the programme and as a result, the broader
effects of the programme throughout the school were not found. Several teachers commented on
the need for whole school training, i.e. the training of all staff, so that the strategies that are used
6 Evaluation of Zippy’s Friends in Ireland
in Zippy’s Friends could be reinforced with all children in classrooms through cross-curricular
activities and also in the schoolyard. Teachers also recognised the need for greater parental
involvement in the programme so that what is taught in class could be reinforced in the home
environment and in the local community setting.
Key Findings on Programme Implementation
• Programme Fidelity: The process evaluation findings indicate that the programme was
implemented with a high degree of programme fidelity and that little or no adaptation was actually
required. Both Intervention Type I (full implementation) and Intervention Type II teachers
(partial implementation) fully implemented over 86% of the programme. The teachers’ ratings
of their enthusiasm for the programme, its content appropriateness, the pupils’ enjoyment and
understanding of the sessions, and achievement of aims, were consistently positive and highlight
the level of teacher satisfaction with the programme. The structured user-friendly nature of the
Zippy’s Friends programme, the suitability of the content for the children, and the variety of
engaging activities that were used throughout the programme, were all cited as reasons why the
teachers enjoyed implementing the programme and did so with a high degree of programme
adherence. Evidence of high quality programme implementation was also apparent in the teachers’
and children’s comments about the factors that facilitated programme implementation. The
majority of teachers commented on the importance of the children sitting in a circle. Teachers also
emphasised the importance of teacher preparation before implementing the lessons and the need
to implement the programme consistently every week. In addition, several teachers spoke about
integrating the strategies taught in Zippy’s Friends in other areas of teaching and also about sharing
their personal experiences with the children during the lessons. The level of teacher preparation
and use of personal resources to enhance the lessons indicate the teachers’ commitment to high
quality programme delivery.
• Feedback from Teachers on Programme Implementation: The teachers made a number of
recommendations to improve the implementation of Zippy’s Friends. One of the most frequently
reported recommendations was the need for a whole school approach. The majority of teachers
commented on the need for all teachers in a school to receive training in the programme and the
need for an additional Zippy’s Friends programme for the senior cycle of primary schools. Most
of the teachers recognised the need for parents to be informed about the strategies being taught in
Zippy’s Friends and also the need for some type of home exercise book, that both parent and child
completed, which would reinforce what was being taught each week.
• Factors Influencing Implementation: The most frequently reported barrier to implementing
the Zippy’s Friends programme was lack of time. Teachers referred to the problem of finding
the time to implement the lesson during the day when all the children were present. Several
teachers also spoke about the issue of curriculum overload in teaching. The overall busyness of the
classroom has implications for teaching a programme such as Zippy’s Friends in terms of getting
commitment from all teachers, finding the space, time and resources to support its implementation
within an already over stretched timetable. Teachers suggested that the strategies used in Zippy’s
Friends (e.g. effective communication skills, listening skills, problem solving skills and coping
skills) could be taught as part of the overall classroom ethos. Therefore, it is recommended
Health Promotion Research Centre, NUI Galway. 7
that a mental health promoting ethos that would support cross-curricular social and emotional
learning would be adopted in the classes and also throughout the school so that strategies taught
in a programme such as Zippy’s Friends would be reinforced throughout the curriculum and
school day and not just during the ‘Zippy class’. A number of teachers also recommended that the
programme should be implemented over one academic year, as opposed to being split over two
academic years as in the present study, in order that the children would receive all six modules.
• The School Ethos: Overall, the results from the Ethos Questionnaire indicate that both
intervention and control schools provide a positive and supportive school environment for
the children and that all teachers within the schools work towards providing for the children’s
needs. Teachers in both the intervention and control schools recognised the importance and
value of teaching social and emotional learning in primary schools, particularly for children
living in disadvantaged communities. While most teachers reported that parents are interested
and supportive of the school and its governance, fewer teachers reported active involvement of
a broad range of parents in school life. The results from the Ethos questionnaire clearly illustrate
the need for greater collaboration between schools, parents and key stakeholders within the local
community.
• Impact on the Teaching of SPHE: The results from the SPHE questionnaire show clearly that the
teachers who taught the Zippy’s Friends programme reported implementing more of the SPHE
curriculum than the teachers in the control group. In relation to certain SPHE strand units such
as: ‘Relating to Others’, ‘Self ’ Identity’, ‘Myself and my Family’, there were significant differences
in level of implementation between intervention and control groups. These results indicate that
the intervention teachers implemented substantially more of the SPHE curriculum than the
control group. At the end of programme review sessions some teachers suggested that the Zippy’s
Friends provided them with a framework and a structure within which to teach parts of the SPHE
curriculum.
Conclusions
• The findings from this pilot implementation of the Zippy’s Friends programme indicate that
the programme was successfully implemented in DEIS primary schools in Ireland and led to a
number of significant positive effects for the pupils and teachers. Consistent with the findings
from previous studies the programme significantly improved the emotional literacy and coping
skills of the children, reduced their hyperactivity levels and lead to improved relationships in
the classroom. The programme complements the teaching of the existing SPHE curriculum and
leads to a greater awareness among teachers of the importance of social and emotional learning
in the curriculum. The planned twelve month follow-up of the programme effects, including
the assessment of the programme impact on the children’s academic performance, will clearly
strengthen the conclusions that can be drawn regarding the longer term impact of this programme.
However, at this stage, it is clear that the encouraging evaluation results support the broader roll
out and sustainability of the programme within the primary school setting.
• Results from the process evaluation revealed that the programme was well received by both
children and teachers and was implemented with a high degree of programme fidelity. The teachers
8 Evaluation of Zippy’s Friends in Ireland
commented on the activity-based learning which took place throughout the programme and the
manner in which the children were able to draw upon their own experiences and identify with
the key themes of the programme. It is evident from this study that this type of structured ‘childcentered, activity-based’ learning is an important factor in the success of a programme and is a
necessary ingredient for the sustainability of emotional wellbeing programmes in schools. The
call from the teachers for another Zippy’s Friends programme at the senior end of primary school
suggests the need to adapt the methodologies and strategies that have been used and proven to be
effective in Zippy’s Friends and apply them to the senior classes in primary schools. The Zippy’s
Friends programme is recognised by the teachers in this study as being a valuable resource in the
delivery of the SPHE curriculum. The recognition by teachers of the need for parental involvement
and whole school training in the programme further supports the need for a more holistic
approach to implementing social and emotional learning in primary schools.
• Supportive organisational and system-level policies and practices are needed in order to ensure
the sustainable integration of the programme as a resource for enhancing the school curriculum.
Scaling up the programme at a national level will require the support and collaboration of the
national education and health agencies in the coordination of teacher training, ongoing support
and quality assurance to ensure effective implementation at the local level.
• The positive evaluation findings clearly indicate the benefits of the Zippy’s Friends programme
for the children and teachers in DEIS schools who participated in this study. These findings are
in keeping with a broader base of international evidence on the benefits of emotional wellbeing
programmes for children’s emotional and social functioning and improved academic performance.
Schools have an important function in nurturing children’s social and emotional development
as well as their academic and cognitive development. The integration of social and emotional
learning into the school curriculum supports schools in achieving their educational mission. The
increasing recognition that enhancing children’s social and emotional competencies also improves
their ability to learn and achieve academically supports the value of programmes such as Zippy’s
Friends and their incorporation into the school setting.