ABSTRACT
Objective: To evaluate the effect of a preventative intervention in Jamaican basic schools on child
behaviour and parent-teacher contacts.
Design and Methods: Five basic schools in Kingston, Jamaica, were randomly assigned to an
intervention (n = 3) or control (n = 2) condition. Intervention involved seven whole-day teacher
workshops using the Incredible Years Teacher Training Programme supplemented by fourteen lessons
on social and emotional skills in each class. Within each classroom (n = 27), children were screened
for behaviour difficulties through teacher report and children with the greatest difficulties were selected
for evaluation of outcomes (135 children). Teachers’reports of child behaviour using the Strengths and
Difficulties Questionnaire and of the quality of teacher-parent contacts were collected at the beginning
and end of the school year. Multilevel regression analyses controlling for school and classroom were
used to evaluate the effects of intervention on child behaviour.
Results: Significant benefits of intervention were found for children’s conduct problems (regression
coefficient (b) = -0.62, 95% confidence interval (CI): -0.01, -1.23), hyperactivity (b = -0.84, 95% CI:
-1.57, -0.11) and peer problems (b = -1.24, 95% CI: -1.89, -0.59).
The effect sizes were 0.26 for conduct problems, 0.36 for hyperactivity and 0.71 for peer
problems. No significant benefits were found for the prosocial and emotional problems subscales. The
intervention also resulted in increases in the number of positive teacher-parent contacts (p < 0.0001).
No benefits were found for the number of negative teacher-parent contacts.
Conclusion: This is a promising approach for reducing children’s externalizing behaviour and peer
problems and for improving the quality of teachers’ contacts with parents of children with behaviour
problems.
Prevención de los Problemas de Comportamiento a Través de una Intervención
Universal en las Escuelas Preescolares de Jamaica
Un Estudio Piloto
H Baker-Henningham1, SP Walker2, C Powell
2, J Meeks Gardner3
RESUMEN
Objetivo: Evaluar el efecto de una intervención preventiva en el comportamiento de los niños y los
contactos entre padres y maestros en las escuelas preescolares de Jamaica.
Diseño y Métodos: Cinco escuelas preescolares en Kingston, Jamaica, fueron asignadas de manera
aleatoria a una intervención (n = 3) o condición de control (n = 2). La intervención comprendió siete
talleres de maestro el día entero, usando el Programa de Entrenamiento de Maestros “Años
Increíbles”, complementado por catorce lecciones sobre habilidades sociales y emocionales en cada
clase. Dentro de cada aula (n = 27), se realizó un pesquisaje de niños en busca de dificultades en la
conducta a través del informe del maestro, y los niños con las mayores dificultades fueron
seleccionados para la evaluación de resultados (135 niños). Informes de los maestros sobre la
conducta de los niños – realizados mediante el Cuestionario de fortalezas y dificultades, y sobre la
From: 1Department of Educational Studies, The University of the Westa
Indies, Kingston 7, Jamaica, 2Epidemiology Research Unit, TMRI, and
3Caribbean Child Development Centre, Open Campus, The University of the
West Indies.
Correspondence: Dr H Baker-Henningham, Epidemiology Research Unit,
TMRI, The University of the West Indies, Kingston 7, Jamaica, West Indies.
Fax (876) 927-2984, E-mail:helen.henningham@uwimona.edu.jm
461
calidad de los contactos entre maestros y padres – fueron recogidos al inicio y al final del año escolar.
Análisis de regresión multinivel para el control de la escuela y el aula, fueron usados para evaluar los
efectos de la intervención sobre el comportamiento de los niños.
Resultados: Se hallaron beneficios significativos para los problemas de la conducta de los niños
(coeficiente de regresión (b) = -0.62, 95% intervalo de confianza (IC): -0.01, -1.23), hiperactividad
(b = -0.84, 95% IC: -1.57, -0.11) y problemas con los iguales (b = -1.24, 95% IC: -1.89, -0.59).
Los tamaños de efecto fueron 0.26 para los problemas de conducta, 0.36 para la hiperactividad
y 0.71 para los problemas de iguales. No se hallaron beneficios significativos para las subescalas de
problemas prosociales y emocionales. La intervención también trajo como resultado aumentos en el
número de contactos positivos entre maestros y padres (p < .0001). No se hallaron beneficios para el
número de contactos negativos maestros-padres.
Conclusión: Este trabajo representa un abordaje prometedor a la hora de reducir la conducta
externalizadora de los niños y los problemas de iguales, así como para mejorar la calidad de los
contactos entre los maestros y los padres de los niños con problemas de conducta.
West Indian Med J 2009; 58 (5): 461
Baker-Henningham et al
INTRODUCTION
Children’s behaviour problems emerge early in life and predict a range of negative outcomes in later life including
conduct disorder, academic under-achievement, school dropout, substance abuse and continuing psychiatric disorders in
adulthood (1).
Schools provide a logical setting for implementing
preventative interventions. Meta-analyses and systematic
reviews of school-based violence prevention programmes
report overall positive effects on children’s aggressive and
disruptive behaviour (2, 3). The benefits of school-based
programmes starting in early childhood have been sustained
until the end of primary school (4) and into late adolescence
(5). Benefits to participants have also been reported in early
adulthood including fewer drug and alcohol abuse disorders,
reduced rates of cigarette smoking, less antisocial personality
disorder (6) and better educational and economic attainment
and mental and sexual health (7). The majority of schoolbased violence prevention programmes have been conducted
in the United States of America (USA) and it is important to
determine if these interventions can be effective when used in
a different cultural and economic context.
Jamaica has a high prevalence of violent crime and increasing numbers of aggressive and violent incidents among
school-aged children. In a survey of 5 to 6 year old Jamaican
children, the prevalence of externalizing disorders was 12%
and none had received assistance for their behaviour
problems (8). The prevalence of behaviour problems is likely to be substantially higher in low-income, inner-city areas
(9). Over 98% of young Jamaican children are enrolled in
pre-school institutions and hence interventions implemented
in these settings provide the potential for almost universal
coverage. We previously reported that a preventative intervention in basic schools, aimed at reducing conduct problems
and promoting social and emotional competence, benefitted
observed teachers’ practices and ratings of classroom
atmosphere and children’s classroom behaviour (10). In this
paper, we report the effect of the intervention on the
behaviour of children at higher risk for developing conduct
problems and the quality of teacher-parent contacts.
METHODS
Study Design and Sample
Five pre-schools were selected to participate in the study.
Two schools served a wide catchment area, included children
from lower and lower middle class families and each class
had a separate room. The other three schools were situated
in violence prone inner-city communities, served children
from predominantly low socio-economic backgrounds and
the classrooms were divided by chalkboards. Two of these
schools were small and situated near each other and for the
purpose of randomization were classified as one school. The
schools were matched by type and one school from each pair
was randomly allocated to intervention or control condition.
Three schools (comprising 15 classrooms) were allocated to
the intervention and two schools (comprising 12 classrooms)
were allocated to the control condition.
Children with high initial levels of conduct problems
have generally been found to benefit most from school based
preventative interventions (11, 12) and hence a subsample of
children identified by their teachers as having behaviour
problems were evaluated. An interviewer-administered
screening questionnaire was conducted with each class
teacher in all study schools four weeks after the start of the
school year. For each child in their class, teachers were asked
to indicate whether or not they had behaviour difficulty
defined as “Child has some difficulty with behaviour (for
example, fighting, disrupting the class), paying attention (including, often out of seat, not doing their work, not listening
to teacher) and/or getting along with other children.” This
definition was based on the ‘Is there a problem?’ question on
the Strengths and Difficulties questionnaire (13).
Information was collected for all children attending the
five schools (n = 594) and 27.8% (165) of the children had a
462
teacher-reported behaviour difficulty, with a mean (SD) of
6.1 (2.4) children in each class. If a teacher identified more
than six children, they were asked to nominate the six children with the highest levels of problem behaviour. Parental
consent was not obtained for 13 children (six refusals and
seven did not return consent forms) and these children were
replaced by other children from the same class who had been
identified as having a behaviour problem and for whom
parental consent was obtained. A total of 135 children were
included in the evaluation – 69 children from the intervention
schools and 66 from the control schools. Six children (4.4%)
were lost to follow-up, two from the intervention group and
four from the control group. Nearly two-thirds of the children who were evaluated were boys – 66.7% (44) in the
control group and 63.8% (44) in the intervention group.
Ethical approval for the study was given by The
University of the West Indies/University Hospital of the West
Indies Ethics Committee. Written informed consent was
obtained from all teachers and all parents of children
included in the evaluation.
Measurements
Child behaviour at school
Child behaviour was measured by teacher report using the
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) at the beginning and end of the school year. The SDQ consists of 25
questions, divided into 5 subscales: conduct problems, hyperactivity, emotional problems, peer problems and pro-social
behaviours (13). Test retest reliabilities (Intraclass correlation coefficients) for 22 children over 2 weeks were between
0.80 and 0.85 for all subscales.
Quality of teacher-parent contacts
At baseline and follow-up, teachers were also asked about
contacts they had with parents of the selected children during
the past week. If the teacher reported a contact, they were
asked to describe it and it was rated as positive (for example,
praise of the child), neutral (for example, greeting, routines)
or negative (for example, criticizing the child). The numbers
of positive and negative contacts were used in the analysis.
One interviewer administered the SDQ and teacherparent contact questionnaires and interobserver reliabilities
with the trainer was > 0.95 on 10 consecutive interviews
prior to the start of the study. The interviewer was unaware
of the children’s group allocation.
The Intervention
The intervention was based on the Incredible Years (IY)
Teacher Training Programme and aspects of the IY Child
Training Programme (14) and was delivered on a school wide
basis. The IY Teacher Training curriculum includes modules
on partnering with parents, developing positive relationships
with children, preventing and reducing inappropriate behaviour and teaching social and emotional skills. A collaborative training process is used and teachers are
encouraged to work together to solve their own and each
other’s problems relating to child behaviour and classroom
management. The curriculum was delivered to all teachers in
the intervention schools over seven full days of training, once
a month from October to April. In addition, an individual
consultation session was conducted once a month with each
teacher in his/her classroom.
Fourteen lessons were conducted by the first author or
a research assistant from January to May, in collaboration
with the class teacher, for all children in the class. During
these lessons, teachers were exposed to an apprenticeship
style of learning and gained additional support in implementing the strategies taught during the workshops in their
own classroom context. The lessons covered the following
concepts drawn from the IY Dina Dinosaur Classroom Curriculum: 1) learning the school rules, 2) understanding
emotions, 3) anger management and 4) friendship skills.
Each lesson lasted approximately 30–40 minutes and
consisted of a circle time discussion and a follow-up activity.
Follow-up activities included art activities, bingo and structured play sessions to practice friendship skills. The activities were designed to use materials that were readily
available in the basic school classrooms (eg modelling clay,
bottle stoppers) and in addition, each school was provided
with a small amount of additional resources (eg building
blocks, manipulatives and puppets). The class teachers were
asked to review the concepts taught by the research team
during the week and they were also coached on how to promote children’s use of the skills throughout the school day.
The control schools were provided with an equivalent
amount of additional resources at the beginning of the school
year and the teachers were visited bimonthly by a member of
the research team. At the end of the study, teachers in the
control schools received two days of training using the
Incredible Years teacher training programme.
Analysis
Data were entered into SPSS and checked independently and
imported into MLWin for multivariate analysis. The effect of
treatment on child SDQ subscale scores was examined on an
intention to treat basis using multilevel multiple regression
analyses to take into account the hierarchical structure of the
study. School was entered as a random variable at level three
and classroom was entered as a random variable at level two
to account for the variance among classrooms and schools.
In the fixed part of the model (Level 1), the dependent variable was the final child SDQ subscale score and the independent variables were baseline score, child gender and treatment group. For the variables representing the number of
positive and negative teacher-parent contacts, chi-square
tests were used to compare the intervention and control group
at baseline and follow-up.
Preventing Child Behaviour Problems in Jamaican Schools
463
RESULTS
The teachers in the study (n = 27) had been teaching for a
median of 10 years (range 3 to 31 years) with no difference
between the intervention and control groups. More than 80%
of the teachers had completed high school but only three (two
from the control group and one from the intervention group)
were trained teachers. The mean (SD) class size was 23.6
(6.1) and there was no difference between the groups.
Teachers in the intervention group attended a median of 6.3
workshops (range 3.5 – 7) and only two teachers attended
less than six workshops.
Over 90% (n = 122) of the children evaluated scored in
the abnormal range on at least one subscale of the SDQ and
an additional 5% scored in the borderline range on at least
two subscales. The screening question was therefore successful in identifying children with difficulties.
The selected children attended a median of twelve of
the 14 class lessons led by the research team (range 5–14
lessons). At baseline, there were no significant differences
between the groups on teacher reported prosocial behaviour,
hyperactivity, conduct or emotional problems but the intervention group had significantly fewer peer problems (Table
1). In hierarchical multiple regression analyses, controlling
DISCUSSION
In this study, we report that a universal preventative intervention implemented over one school-year in Jamaican community preschools significantly reduced children’s conduct
problems, hyperactivity and peer problems as reported by
teachers on the SDQ. Benefits were also found with respect
to the quality of teachers’ contacts with the parents of
children with behavioural difficulties, with intervention
teachers reporting more positive teacher-parent contacts than
control teachers. The schools were matched by type and
randomly allocated to intervention or control group and there
were no differences between the groups in teachers’ experience, qualifications or class size. A significant difference
was found for teacher reports of child peer problems at baseline with teachers in the control group reporting higher levels
of difficulties. However, baseline scores were controlled for
in the analysis. We are therefore reasonably confident that
the benefits reported were a result of the intervention.
In a meta-analysis of school-based violence prevention
programmes, the mean effect sizes on child outcomes were
between 0.20 and 0.35 (3). The effect sizes in the current
study were within this range or higher showing that the
intervention benefits were comparable to those in previous
studies which were mostly conducted in the USA. The findings that the IY Teacher Training Programme led to improvements in the quality of teacher-parent contacts also concur
with previous studies from the USA (12).
Table 1: Child behaviour on the SDQ at baseline and follow-up by study
group
Control Intervention p-value
n = 66 n = 69
Mean (SD) Mean (SD)
Prosocial subscale Baseline 5.1 (2.7) 4.9 (2.1) 0.63
Follow-up 5.7 (2.6) 6.4 (2.1) 0.06
Conduct problems Baseline 4.9 (2.2) 4.1 (2.6) 0.06
Follow-up 4.7 (2.4) 3.5 (2.4) 0.007
Hyperactivity Baseline 6.6 (2.3) 6.6 (2.4) 0.86
Follow-up 6.6 (2.3) 5.5 (2.4) 0.009
Peer problems Baseline 2.9 (1.8) 2.3 (1.7) 0.02
Follow-up 2.9 (1.4) 1.5 (1.4) < 0.0001
Emotional problems Baseline 2.7 (2.0) 2.5 (2.1) 0.42
Follow-up 2.6 (2.0) 1.9 (1.9) < .0001
t-tests used to test group differences in child behaviour
for child sex and initial score, classroom and school, benefits
of intervention were found for the conduct problems,
hyperactivity and peer problems subscales of the SDQ (Table
2). No significant benefits were found for the prosocial and
emotional problems subscales.
There were no significant differences between the
groups on the number of negative or positive contacts between teachers and parents at baseline (Table 3). At post-test,
teachers in the intervention group reported significantly more
positive contacts with parents (p < 0.0001) but there was no
significant difference between the groups in the number of
negative contacts with parents (p = 0.28).
Table 2: Multilevel regression analyses of effects of intervention on child
behaviour on the SDQ
B (95% CI) Effect size
Prosocial 0.78 (-0.07, 1.63)
† 0.33
Conduct problems -0.62 (-0.01, -1.23)* 0.26
Hyperactivity -0.84 (-1.57, -0.11)* 0.36
Peer problems -1.24 (-1.89, -0.59)*** 0.71
Emotional problems -0.51 (-1.21, 0.19) 0.25
†p < .1, *p < .05, **p < .01,***p < .001
0 = control, 1 = intervention
Controlling for initial score, child sex, school and classroom
Table 3: Teacher-parent contacts during the past week at baseline and
follow-up by study group
Control Intervention p-value
n = 66 n = 69
n (%) n (%)
Positive contacts
(one or more) Baseline 4 (6.5) 9 (13.4) .19
Follow-up 12 (20) 26 (40.6) < .0001
Negative contacts
(one or more) Baseline 16 (25.8) 20 (29.9) .61
Follow-up 11 (18.3) 7 (10.9) .28
Chi-square tests used to test group differences in teacher-parent contacts
Baker-Henningham et al
464
Few studies have examined the mechanisms through
which school-based preventative interventions have their
effects but changes in children’s neurocognitive functioning
(15) and a reduction in the level of aggressiveness in the
classroom (16) have been shown to be related to improvements in child behaviour. In preventative interventions involving parent training, improvements in parenting were
related to improvements in child behaviour (4, 17). Although
this has not been examined for teacher interventions, it is
possible that the benefits to child behaviour were mediated in
part by the improvements in teachers’ practices reported
previously (10).
There are several limitations of this study. The study
was small-scale involving only five schools and the results
may not be generalizable to other basic schools in Jamaica.
Teacher ratings of child behaviour were used and it is possible that intervention teachers rated children more favourably. However, evidence from the literature shows that
teacher-reported behaviour has been shown to be less sensitive to change from preventative interventions than direct observations of child behaviour (18, 19). In addition, we only
had teacher reports of the quality of teacher-parent contacts.
The study shows that training basic school teachers in
classroom management and how to promote children’s social
and emotional competence is a promising approach for improving child behaviour and the quality of teacher-parent
contacts. During the screening, teachers identified over a
quarter of young children with behaviour difficulties suggesting that the intervention also met a recognized need.
This study was a pilot of the feasibility of implementing the
Incredible Years interventions in the Jamaican setting. The
next steps are to evaluate the teacher programme in a larger
sample of schools and to use direct observations of child
behaviour. In future studies, it will be important to determine
the degree of support required by teachers to implement the
strategies effectively and to plan for the sustainability of the
programme.