Abstract
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the role of prosocial behaviour against aggression in a school-based universal intervention adapted in two different (non-Western) countries, Colombia and Chile. Using a randomised pretest–post-test design (and controlling for participants' gender and parents' level of education), current results highlighted different effects of a similar programme in both sites. First, the school-based universal programme designed for promoting prosocial behaviours in the peer context obtained a positive cross-national effect on prosocial behaviour rated by three informants (i.e. self, peer and teacher reports). In Colombia, this effect was moderated by the initial level of prosociality of the participants and their level of education. Mediational two-wave model corroborated that the improvement on prosocial behaviours in both countries (moderated in the case of Colombia) predicted significantly lower level of physical aggression. Characteristics of the implementation considering different cultural and historical backgrounds were discussed.

Demands on schools to prevent problematic behaviours among students and promote their successful development have grown in the last decades (e.g. Durlak, Weissberg, Dymnicki, Taylor, & Schellinger, 2011). Interestingly, preventive school-based interventions not only focus on reducing problem behaviours but also on fostering the development of positive behaviours, enhancing students' socio-emotional competences, character, health and civic engagement (e.g. Conduct Problems Prevention Research Group, 2010). Among those socio-emotional skills that may counteract aggression, prosocial behaviour has been identified as a crucial protective factor against different facets of violence (see Eisenberg, Spinrad, & Knafo-Noam, 2015; Malti, Ribeaud, & Eisner, 2011). However, the extent to which the promotion of prosocial behaviour in a natural setting (i.e. via intervention programmes) can reduce behavioural problems is still a matter of debate. Most important, the majority of these programmes have been implemented in samples from Western, Educated, Industrialised, Rich and Democratic societies (WEIRD; Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010). Accordingly, there is a need to adopt a wider perspective on preventive interventions which takes into account the role played by cultural and national factors to test the efficacy of school-based programmes (Castro, Barrera, & Martinez, 2004). The present study is aimed at partially addressing this gap by adapting the “Promoting Prosocial and Emotional Skills to Counteract Externalizing Problems in Adolescence” (CEPIDEA; Caprara, Luengo Kanacri, Zuffianò, Gerbino, & Pastorelli, 2015), in two different countries (Chile and Colombia1). The CEPIDEA is a school-based universal programme specifically designed to promote prosocial behaviours in the peer context as a way to counteract aggressive behaviours during adolescence. The programme, designed and implemented for the first time in Rome (Italy), showed positive effects on several main outcomes such as prosocial behaviour, interpersonal self-efficacy, academic achievement and physical aggression (Caprara et al., 2014, 2015). Importantly, mediation analysis indicated the protective effect of prosocial behaviours for decreasing aggressive behaviours among adolescents (Caprara et al., 2015). These findings, however, stemmed from a quasi-experimental design, thereby preventing firm conclusions about the true efficacy of the intervention. Yet, considering the promising results, the programme was adapted and implemented in Medellín (Colombia) and in Santiago (Chile) using a cluster randomised controlled trial (CRCT) design. In particular, the adaptation of the programme in the two countries followed local considerations of historical and cultural processes. In Medellín (Colombia), the programme incorporated a focus on linking the enactment of prosocial behaviours to conflict resolution, while in Santiago (Chile) the adaptation included a stronger focus on promoting civic engagement and social cohesion within classrooms through the enactment of prosocial behaviours. The adapted programme in Chile was called ProCiviCo (i.e. “Promoting prosocial behaviour and civic engagement for social cohesion in school settings”; Luengo Kanacri & Jiménez-Moya, 2017). In Chile, this ad hoc focus on civic engagement was added to have, as a long-term aim, the promotion of social cohesion and universalism value among Chilean citizens; whereas in Colombia the long-term focus was related with a positive (conciliatory) school climate.

PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOUR AS A PROTECTIVE FACTOR AGAINST AGGRESSION
Numerous studies have shown how the tendency to enact prosocial behaviour—voluntary and intentional behaviour that benefits another (Eisenberg et al., 2015)—predicts a series of indicators of adjustment in childhood and adolescence, such as academic achievement (e.g. Caprara et al., 2015), and civic engagement (e.g. Luengo Kanacri et al., 2014). Instead, aggressive behaviour—behaviour intentionally aimed to cause physical or psychological harm (Krahé, 2013)—has been associated with negative outcomes such as school dropout (e.g. Kokko, Tremblay, Lacourse, Nagin, & Vitaro, 2006) and both overt and covert antisocial behaviours (e.g. Eisner & Malti, 2015).

To our knowledge, only two studies examined the longitudinal and simultaneous relation between prosocial and aggressive behaviours across childhood and adolescence. Obsuth, Eisner, Malti, and Ribeaud (2015) tested the cross-lagged relations between prosocial and aggressive behaviours using a 5-year longitudinal covering the transition to late childhood and early adolescence (aged 7–11 years) from Switzerland. Results from their study supported the negative prediction of aggressive behaviour on prosocial behaviour 1 year later but not vice versa (Obsuth et al., 2015). This cross-lagged longitudinal pattern was also observed in a study conducted in another dissimilar cultural context, China (Chen, Huang, Chang, Wang, & Li, 2010).

Coherently with this reasoning, the idea that the roots of aggressive behaviours partially may be found in scarce behavioural assets (e.g. Dodge, Coie, & Lynam, 2006) was also stressed by the influential Moffitt (1993)'s work. Following Moffitt's perspective, life-course-persistent aggressiveness also reflects a lack of contextual opportunities to learn and practice prosocial alternatives at each stage of development. In this vein, considering the relevance that the peer context exerts on adolescent prosocial development (e.g. Berger, Batanova, & Cance, 2015), preventive efforts might have as a central aim the development of prosocial behaviours intentionally focused on peer interactions.

THE THEORETICAL MODEL AND PROGRAM BACKGROUND
The theoretical model underlying the CEPIDEA programme address the personal roots of prosocial behaviours and stems from the integration of various research backgrounds, such as personality, developmental and social psychology. Values which emphasises equality, reciprocity and cooperation are considered relevant motives for prosocial behaviours, such as self-transcendence values (e.g. benevolence and universalism; Schwartz, 2010) and constitute the first component of the CEPIDEA intervention. However, guiding principles and moral standards may not be enough for behaving prosocially. The enactment of prosocial tendencies also involves emotional regulation abilities needed for both show socially competent abilities and lock and interrupt negative externalising behaviours (e.g. Eisenberg et al., 2015). Indeed, longitudinal empirical findings stressed that individual differences in prosociality are positively related to early emotional and behavioural self-regulation skills (e.g. Luengo Kanacri, Pastorelli, Eisenberg, Zuffianò, & Caprara, 2013). In particular, the management of one's own negative emotions can likely increase perspective taking while preventing the onset of personal distress (see Eisenberg et al., 2015). In addition, individuals' emotional adjustment implies their knowledge about when and how positive emotions (e.g. gratitude and joy) should be expressed to maintain and develop good peer interactions. Besides, a great amount of developmental literature stresses the key role of empathy and perspective-talking skills as roots of behaving prosocially (see Eisenberg et al., 2015). Thus, the enhancement of empathic and emotional regulation skills constitutes two key components of the CEPIDEA programme.

Moreover, prosocial behaviours are considered precursors of civic engagement because they may support the development of concern for others from an individual to a “collective” or society level (e.g. Eisenberg et al., 2015; Caprara et al., 2015). In this vein, because schools should promote positive social skills, habits and values that allow students to participate actively in their communities, prosocial behaviour is a key target variable for preparing youth to be engaged in their community. As stressed by a recent longitudinal research, promoting civic school participation may, in turn, reinforce further prosocial behaviours across adolescence (Luengo Kanacri & Jiménez-Moya, 2017). Thus, offer opportunities for act prosocial and civic involvement at school in the peer context is the final component of the CEPIDEA curriculum.

In terms of relevant contents of the CEPIDEA programme, the aforementioned personal determinants (i.e. prosocial values, empathic and emotion regulation skills) and related outcomes (i.e. civic school engagement) of prosocial behaviours are the conceptual components of the intervention and constitute the foundations of the conceptual theory behind the CEPIDEA intervention. In terms of the action theory (i.e. the theory by which the programme will have an impact in expected variables or mechanisms; Mackinnon, 2008), in our intervention the social cognitive theory (SCT; see Bandura, 1997) had a prominent role. According to SCT, self-efficacy beliefs (i.e. individuals' confidence in their abilities across different domains of functioning) have been identified as the most proximal predictors of prosocial behaviours (Caprara, Alessandri, & Eisenberg, 2012). Indeed, emotional, empathic, interpersonal self-efficacy beliefs during adolescence may exert a critical and a proximal role on responding prosocially in peer contexts, because if adolescents' beliefs about their abilities to positively interact with peers in situations of need are high, they probably will be able to react to peer's feelings and help them accordingly. The good news is that self-efficacy beliefs are relatively flexible and permeable psychological structures to environmental inputs and teaching strategies (see Bandura, 1997) and may help adolescents to turn their potential into actual prosocial conducts (Caprara et al., 2012). Accordingly, the programme adopted learning strategies for the promotion of interpersonal and social self-efficacy beliefs, such as persuasion, modelling and mastery experiences (Bandura, 1997), applied to the enactment of prosocial behaviours.

THE IMPLEMENTATION IN COLOMBIA AND CHILE
In the attempt to design an effective school-based preventive intervention that might be also culturally pertinent (Castro et al., 2004), the CEPIDEA programme was adapted in two different Latinoamerican countries. Even if Colombia and Chile share some regional common characteristics and roots, they also show specific cultural and historical processes that have been considered as first steps of the programme adaptation.

When peace and (armed) conflict matters: The case of Colombia
During the past five decades Colombia has suffered one of the world's most prolonged and violent conflicts, with more than 200,000 deaths, thousands of forced disappearances and almost 7 million people displaced ( Herbolzheimer, 2016). At the same time, nowadays Colombia shows an improvement in performance during the last decade according to The Human Development Index (HDI) in which this country ranks in an intermediate level of human development in Latin America (HDI, 2018).

The last historical processes occurred in this country and the recent peace agreement are not considered the end of the peace process in Colombia, rather it can be the beginning of a transitional process to address long-neglected structural problems of poverty and social inclusion (Herbolzheimer, 2016). Therefore, promoting peaceful coexistence is one of the most important aspects of citizenship training in Colombia (Krug, Dalhberg, Mercy, & Zwi, 2002). Within this scenario, socialisation practices in which teaching children positive ways to overcome conflicts, using prosociality rather than aggressiveness, can be particularly relevant; even more in a country that gives great value to the collective standards of cooperation (Herbolzheimer, 2016). Thus, efforts to adapt the CEPIDEA intervention programme to some facets of the historical and cultural reality of Colombia, pushed us to focus on teaching prosocial behaviours as an alternative way to solve peacefully interpersonal conflicts. In addition, recent findings of a two-wave study of Colombian adolescents showed bidirectional relations among positivity, positive school climate and prosocial behaviours, suggesting that reinforcing positive feelings and thinking in this context may support positive school climate and then prosocial behaviours (Luengo Kanacri & Jiménez-Moya, 2017). Finally, because the CEPIDEA programme was developed for students coming from the lower social status, the programme gave a special attention to adapt some strategies signed by social issues related with contexts of poverty.

When social class (really) matters: The case of Chile
The Global Competitiveness Index, a combination of 12 factors of competitiveness,2 locates Chile as the 33th most competitive country in the world and the highest in South America (Central Intelligence Agency, 2018). Chile has growingly showed regional leadership, owing to its stable democracy, high quality of life and comparatively low poverty rates (see World Bank, 2018). At the same time, Chile is an extremely fragmented country in terms of socio-economic status (SES) and, in fact, it presents the highest GINI index3 of inequality among the countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), (2015). This segregation is reflected in many dimensions, such as the health system and the division across territories and neighbourhoods, among others (see Programa de las Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo [PNUD], 2017). This inequality is also well-manifested in the educational system, which is one of the most segregated systems of the world, triggering unbalanced education opportunities among students from different social classes (see Villalobos & Valenzuela, 2012; see also Carrasco, Bogolasky, Flores, Gutiérrez, & San Martín, 2014). It seems that prosocial behaviour and solidarity does not necessarily improve intergroup relations between high and low social class individuals, on the contrary, Chileans report low levels of unity (see COES survey, 2015).

In sum, given that Chile is a highly segregated society in terms of SES, we argue that the improvement of prosocial behaviour needs to be guided to improve social cohesion among individuals from different social classes. The ProCiviCo programme takes into account this intergroup dimension, framing it as necessary in order to improve social cohesion through prosocial behaviour.

The adaptation of CEPIDEA in Colombia and ProCiviCo in Chile
The effort to adapt the goals of the CEPIDEA intervention in the context of Colombia have been oriented towards the development of prosocial and citizen competencies, that is, towards those emotional, empathic and communicative skills, that make possible for students to learn constructive ways, alternative to the use of violence, in overcoming conflicts in society. Thus, compared with the original CEPIDEA programme created in Italy, in this site, a special focus has been given to: (a) the expression of positive emotions as an emotion regulation subcomponent that may particularly support prosocial behaviours in the context of Colombia; (b) the empathic and communication skills as basis prosocial strategies for peaceful conflict resolution.

As we described above, the ProCiviCo programme includes the requirement of social cohesion given the current situation of the Chilean society. In detail, five components are included and trained in the programme: (a) prosocial responding in the peer context, (b) empathic skills, (c) emotion regulation, (d) prejudice and shared identities and (e) civic participation towards the school community. According to the novel characteristic of this programme (i.e. the inclusion of the long-term goal of promoting social cohesion within classrooms), in the fourth component (d above) we consider the intergroup relations dimension, and concepts such as prejudice and discrimination. Given that research shows that the emergence of a superordinate shared identity promotes positive relations between members from different social groups (e.g. Gaertner & Dovidio, 2000) and it also increases helping behaviour (Levine, Prosser, Evans, & Reicher, 2005) in this fourth and novel component we discussed not only the negative consequences of prejudice but we also highlighted the fact that individuals from different groups share characteristics that join them together.

THE CURRENT STUDY
Using an RCT, the present study aimed to evaluate the pretest post-test effects of the adapted CEPIDEA intervention (i.e. ProCiviCo 
programme in Chile) on its main outcomes, that is, the improvement of prosocial behaviours and the decline of aggressive behaviours. We reasoned that when an intervention expands children's behavioural repertoires, by including models conducive to prosocial exchanges, prosocial behaviours can be improved and likely redirect the tendency to respond with aggressive or violent behaviour (e.g. Dodge et al., 2006). Then, we explored a possible mediation mechanism through which the school-based intervention could have achieved its effects, that is the indirect role of prosocial behaviours in the impact of the programme on the reduction of aggressive behaviours (Caprara et al., 2014).

Finally, SES and gender were also included in our analysis to partial out their possible effects. A great amount of literature supports gender (e.g. see Eisenberg et al., 2015) and SES (e.g. Piff, Kraus, Côté, Cheng, & Keltner, 2010) differences in the manifestation of prosocial behaviours, as well as aggressive behaviours (e.g. Card, Stucky, Sawalani, & Little, 2008). Typically, girls tend to exhibit greater prosocial behaviours than boys across childhood and adolescence (see Eisenberg et al., 2015). Although the association between prosocial behaviour and SES seems to be less consistent (e.g. Keltner, Kogan, Piff, & Saturn, 2014; Rajan, Pink, & Dow, 2009; Korndörfer, Egloff, & Schmukle, 2015), we took into consideration this variable as some schools in Colombia and Chile were from disadvantaged areas. Furthermore, since our programme was targeted as universal, we wanted to explore if the effects of the intervention hold beyond SES and gender.

METHOD
Design
In both sites, randomization processes to the treatment or control condition took place at the school level. Thus, both the intervention and the control group were in different schools and assessed sequentially at two different time points (i.e. pretest and post-test at 1 month after the end of the intervention).

Participants
Colombian sample
The study took place in four middle schools in Medellin, Colombia (two schools for interventions and two for control conditions) and included 320 adolescents (Mage = 12.78, SD = 1.11; 58.1% males) at pretest (Time 1) and 314 adolescents (Mage = 13.16, SD = 1.12; 59% males) at post-test (6 months apart; Time 2). At Time 1, the intervention group included 169 students (Mage = 12.87, SD = 1.15; 57.4% males) belonging to two different schools (two classrooms for each), and the control group included 151 students (Mage = 12.68, SD = 1.06; 58.9% males) belonging to two different schools (two classrooms for each). All participants attended seventh grade at pretest. A few (6.1%) mothers did not have access to the school system, 21.7% completed primary school, 45.8% completed middle school, 11.5% completed high school and 14.9% completed the Master's degree or higher. Analogous percentages for fathers were 6.5, 28.2, 47.7, 5.1 and 12.5% respectively.

Chilean sample
Participants from the Chilean site were 596 adolescents (Mage = 12.29, SD = 0.62; 55.1% males) at T1 and 593 adolescents (Mage = 12.94, SD = 0.69) at T2. At Time 1, the intervention group included 315 students (Mage = 12.28, SD = 0.65; 53.7% males) belonging to four schools (eight classrooms for each), and the control group included 281 students (Mage = 12.30, SD = 0.58; 56.6% males) belonging to other four schools (eight classrooms for each) as well. All participants attended seventh grade at pretest. A few (4%) mothers did not have access to the school system, 12.2% completed primary school, 43.2% completed middle school, 20.3% completed high school and 20.12% completed the Master's degree or higher. Analogous percentages for fathers were 3.5, 15.2, 45.3, 18.4 and 17.6% respectively.

Procedures
The entire study was conducted over a 21- to 24-month period in Chile and Colombia, respectively and included a previous research period (6 months in the case of Colombia and 1 year in the case of Chile) for the adaptation of the programme, assessments, teacher training and classroom activities. First, the programme was presented to the School Council and the assembly of teachers for approval. Then, letters describing the study were sent home with children, and parental informed consent was obtained at each assessment point for students. All the teachers of classrooms involved had been invited to attend training sessions (two sessions per year, with 16 hours of training for Colombia and 22 hours for Chile) and a large part of them participated in Colombia (93%) and Chile (82%). In the intervention group, the research staff worked with teachers using the curriculum materials to plan together the schedule of the intervention. Teachers who could not participate in the training sessions were offered the possibility to attend personal meetings with the research staff to ensure the adherence to the programme. In Colombia, teachers of the control group, after the final assessment, participated in a meeting about the benefits of prosocial behaviour and its role for positive youth development. In Chile, schools of the control group (after the final assessment) received an adapted version of the ProCiviCo programme.

In April 2012 in Colombia (in April 2017 in Chile), students from the intervention and control groups were assessed for the first time (pretest). Then, the prosocial curriculum was implemented from the end of April 2012 (May 2017 in Chile) to October 2012 (November 2017 in Chile). At the end of the intervention, students were evaluated at a 6-month post-test. Letters describing the study were sent home with children, and parental informed consent was obtained at each assessment point for students and in Chile also an individual student's assent was ensured. Questionnaires for participants were administered in each classroom by three to four members of the research team during school hours. The purpose and response choices of the questionnaires were explained to students, parents and teachers who were asked to complete the questionnaires independently of others. In those few cases in which parents were not literate, trained researchers applied the questionnaires in a structured interview format.

Finally, in both sites intervention fidelity was controlled by: (a) manualisation of weekly prosocial sessions (i.e. classrooms activities performed by the university staff in collaboration with the teacher); and prosocial lessons (i.e. conducted by the teachers of all subjects) to ensure the inclusion of the CEPIDEA and ProCiviCo goals in the normal curriculum of the school; (b) regular communication with, and ongoing supervision of, teachers; (c) weekly staff meetings and (d) an ad hoc checklist completed by the research staff at the end of each prosocial session with the aim to evaluate adherence to the programmed specifications.

Measures
Participants' prosocial behaviour and physical aggression were each assessed with a multi-informant approach that combined self, peer and teacher reports.4 At each time point, we averaged the scores across the three informants to create an overall score of prosocial behaviour and physical aggression.

Prosocial behaviour
Students rated their prosocial behaviours using the 16-item Prosociality Scale (Caprara, Steca, Zelli, & Capanna, 2005; e.g. “I share things I like with my friends”). The reduced version of the Prosociality Scale was used with teachers, consisting of the six items (e.g. “He or She tries to console people who are sad”). Prosocial behaviour was also assessed by using three peer-reported items and participants rated each classmate on four items intended to assess the frequency of occurrence of basic prosocial behaviours through a 5-point response scale “How many times does ___ console others?”). Each item (across informant) was rated on a 5-point scale from 1 = never/almost never to 5 = often. Scores across informants were averaged to create a multi--informant measure of prosocial behaviour. Reliability coefficients for the multi-informant construct were α = .83 and .81 at T1 and T2 in Chile and .79 and .76 at T1 and T2 in Colombia.

Physical aggression
Students reported their physical aggression using a reduced version of the Physical and Verbal Aggression Scale (AFV; Caprara & Pastorelli, 1993; e.g. “I fought,” “I give jostling and tripping,” “I threat others”). In addition, participants rated each classmate on two items intended to assess the frequency of occurrence of physical (“How many times does ___ kick and punch others?”) and verbal aggression (“How many times does ___ insult others?”). The AFV was used with teachers, consisting in one item (e.g. “Attacks verbally or physically other people.”). Each item (across informant) was rated on a 5-point scale from 1 = never/almost never to 5 = often). Scores across informants were averaged to create a multi-informant measure of physical aggression. Reliability coefficients for the multi-informant construct were α = .69 and .71 at T1 and T2 in Chile and .70 and .66 at T1 and T2 in Colombia.

Socioeconomic status
As a proxy of SES, we used an average of the highest level of study (from 0 = he/she did not have access to the school system, to 5 = the Master's degree or higher have been completed) reported by both parents (fathers and mothers for all the participants). Parents' education reflects material and intellectual capitals of the family of origin at early ages (Galobardes, Shaw, Lawlor, Lynch, & Davey Smith, 2006). Parents' educational level has also been recognised to be one of the most important indicators of SES by a great number of studies, especially those that focused on its role on children's school achievement (e.g. Mistry, Vandewater, Houston, & McLoyd, 2002).

Data analytic approach
Following recent recommendations for intervention programmes with a pretest–post-test design (Valente & MacKinnon, 2017), we used an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) approach within the latent change score specification to test the direct and mediated effects (intervention → increase in prosocial behaviour → decrease in physical aggression) of our intervention programmes on prosocial behaviour and physical aggression (see Figure 1). As per ANCOVA assumptions (i.e. the regression slopes should be homogeneous across intervention and control group; Valente & MacKinnon, 2017), we also tested the presence of significant interaction effects between the intervention condition and pretest scores in predicting change scores in the constructs of interest. Finally, we also explored whether students' gender and SES moderated the effects of the intervention programme on prosocial behaviour and physical aggression. All models were run in Mplus 8 (Muthén & Muthén, 1998).

Details are in the caption following the image
Figure 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
Mediational model. Note. The effects of students' gender and SES were estimated but not depicted for the sake of simplicity. PB = prosocial behaviour; PA = physical aggression; T1 = Time 1; T2 = Time 2.
RESULTS
Preliminary analyses
Means and standard deviations of prosocial behaviour and physical aggression are reported in Table 1. Multivariate regression analyses indicated that the intervention groups in both the Chilean sample and Colombian sample showed higher initial physical aggression than their respective control groups (b = .216, SE = .052, p < .001, Cohen's d = .353 [95% confidence interval, CI: .191, .515], and b = .239, SE = .054, p < .001, Cohen's d = .521 [95% CI: .286, .755], respectively).5 The intervention group in the Chilean sample also reported lower initial prosocial behaviour than the control group (b = −.134, SE = .047, p = .005, Cohen's d = −.232 [95% CI: −.394, −.071]). The Colombian sample did not show initial differences on prosocial behaviour between the two groups (b = −.025, SE = .052, p = .623, Cohen's d = −.057 [95% CI: −.287, .174]). Given these initial differences on prosocial behaviour and physical aggression between intervention group and control group, we investigated the effect of the intervention using an ANCOVA analysis in which we also considered all possible interaction effects of the treatment condition with pretest scores, gender and SES.

Table 1. Means and SDs of prosocial behaviour and physical aggression by condition
Intervention group	Control group
T1	T2	T1	T2
Mean	SD	Mean	SD	Mean	SD	Mean	SD
Chile
Prosocial behaviour	3.25 (3.52)	.61 (.56)	3.43 (3.52)	.55 (.59)	3.39 (3.54)	.52 (.42)	3.40 (3.51)	.49 (.51)
Physical aggression	1.88 (1.74)	.66 (.62)	1.93 (1.79)	.63 (.66)	1.65 (1.50)	.55 (.46)	1.71 (1.59)	.51 (.52)
Colombia
Prosocial behaviour	3.06 (3.17)	.46 (.41)	3.13 (3.25)	.41 (.40)	3.09 (3.18)	.40 (.40)	3.15 (3.28)	.45 (.53)
Physical aggression	1.59 (1.44)	.48 (.44)	1.65 (1.55)	.53 (.60)	1.35 (1.32)	.43 (.47)	1.55 (1.46)	.45 (.59)
Note. Means and SDs of females are in parenthesis.
Direct effects
Chilean sample
ANCOVA results indicated that the intervention group (0 = control group, 1 = intervention group) reported a steeper increase in prosocial behaviour compared to the control group (b = .102, SE = .027, p < .001, Cohen's d = .298 [95% CI: .123, .473]), while controlling for the non-significant effects of students' gender and SES on the change score (see Table 2). Intervention and control group did not significantly differ in the change rates of physical aggression (b = .068, SE = .036, p = .059, Cohen's d = .165 [95% CI: −.018, .347]). Girls reported lower change scores of physical aggression from T1 to T2, whereas SES did not predict change rates. For both prosocial behaviour and physical aggression, the interaction terms intervention × pretest scores, intervention × gender and intervention × SES were not statistically significant and, therefore, were not retained in the final ANCOVA models.

Table 2. Intervention effects on change scores (Δ) of prosocial behaviour (PB) and physical aggression (PA)
Chile
ΔPB	ΔPA
b	SE	p-Value	b	SE	p-Value
Intervention	0.102	0.027	<.001	0.068	0.036	.059
Gender	0.010	0.014	.476	−0.043	0.018	.019
SES	0.011	0.015	.455	0.003	0.019	.883
Pretest scores	−0.303	0.026	<.001	−0.286	0.031	<.001
Intervention × pretest scores	–	–	–	–	–	–
Intervention × SES	–	–	–	–	–	–
Intervention × gender	–	–	–	–	–	–
Colombia
ΔPB	ΔPA
b	SE	p-Value	b	SE	p-Value
Intervention	0.132	0.110	.229	0.012	0.059	.837
Gender	0.278	0.049	<.001	−0.265	0.058	<.001
SES	0.054	0.032	.093	−0.002	0.028	.954
Pretest scores	−0.398	0.087	<.001	−0.389	0.070	<.001
Intervention × pretest scores	−0.428	0.114	<.001	–	–	–
Intervention × SES	−0.100	0.048	.039	–	–	–
Intervention × gender	–	–	–	–	–	–
Note. Unstandardized effects (b) and their SEs are reported in the table. Intervention (0 = control group, 1 = intervention group); Gender (1 = boys, 2 = girls). Non-significant interaction terms were not retained in the final models. R2 coefficients for ΔPB were .256 and .430 (for Chile and Colombia, respectively). R2 coefficients for ΔPA were .161 and .183 (for Chile and Colombia, respectively).
Colombian sample
ANCOVA results (see Table 2) indicated that there was no main effect of the intervention as the interaction terms intervention × pretest scores (b = −.428, SE = .114, p < .001) and intervention × SES (b = −.100, SE = .048, p = .039) significantly predicted change rates in prosocial behaviour (the interaction term intervention × gender was not statistically significant and therefore was not retained in the final ANCOVA model). To understand the moderation effects, we conducted an analysis of the simple slopes (Cohen, Cohen, West, & Aiken, 2003), which showed that at low initial levels of prosocial behaviour (−1SD), the students in the intervention group increased more in their prosocial behaviour than the control group (b = .311, SE = .118, p = .009), but not at high (+1SD) initial levels of prosocial behaviour (b = −.046, SE = .122, p = .705). Concerning high levels of SES (+1SD), students in the intervention group reported a lower change in prosocial behaviour compared to the control group (b = −.170, SE = .067, p = .012), whereas the two groups did not differ at low levels (−1SD) of SES (b = .027, SE = .068, p = .688).

Change rates in physical aggression were not predicted by the intervention condition (b = .012, SE = .059, p = .837, Cohen's d = .027 [95% CI: −.246, .299]) and SES (see Table 2). Girls reported lower change scores of physical aggression from T1 to T2 (b = −.265, SE = .058, p < .001). For physical aggression, the interaction terms intervention × pretest scores, intervention × gender and intervention × SES were not statistically significant.

Mediated effects
Chilean sample
We used the distribution of the product method (MacKinnon, Fritz, Williams, & Lockwood, 2007) to formally test the hypothesized mediational role of change in prosocial behaviour in decreasing physical aggression (intervention → increase in prosocial behaviour → decrease in physical aggression). In detail, we computed the 95% CIs around the unstandardized mediated effect ab using the PRODCLIN programme (Tofighi & MacKinnon, 2011). The mediational model revealed that the intervention group reported a higher increase in prosocial behaviour than the control group (a = .113, SE = .027, p < .001) which, in turn, significantly predicted lower level of physical aggression (b = −.148, SE = .063, p = .018). Importantly, the mediated effect was also statistically significant (ab = −.017) as the 95% CI did not include zero (−.035, −.002), indicating that the intervention condition (0 = control group, 1 = intervention group) indirectly predicted lower levels of physical aggression from T1 to T2 via the parallel increase in prosocial behaviour.

Colombian sample
As the ANCOVA results indicated two interaction effects of the intervention on prosocial behaviour (intervention × pretest scores and intervention × SES), we tested two moderated mediational models by following the same procedure described above for the Chilean sample. In the first moderated mediational model, we tested the effect of the intervention on physical aggression via the mediational role of prosocial behaviour at both low (−1SD) and high (+1SD) initial levels of prosocial behaviour. Results indicated that, at low initial levels of prosocial behaviour, the mediated effect was statistically different from zero (ab = −.108 [95% CI: −.210, −.031]): the intervention group reported a significant higher increase in prosocial behaviour than the control group (a = .349, SE = .117, p = .003) which, in turn, predicted significantly lower level of physical aggression (b = −.310, SE = .077, p < .001). At high initial levels of prosocial behaviour the mediated effect was not statistically significant as the lower and upper levels of the CIs included zero (ab = .004 [95% CI: −.073, .082]). In the second moderated mediational model, we tested the effect of the intervention on physical aggression via the mediational role of prosocial behaviour at both low (−1SD) and high (+1SD) levels of SES. The mediated effects were not statistically significant neither at low SES (ab = −.020 [95% CI: −.067, .022]) nor at high SES (ab = .041 [95% CI: .000, .093]).

DISCUSSION
Although the promotion of prosocial behaviour has been previously identified as a potential protective factor against aggression (Eisenberg et al., 2015), understanding to what extent its promotion in school-based different cultural contexts can actually work and help reduce adolescents' aggression needs to be clarified. This research attempted to fill this gap by studying the role of prosocial behaviour against aggression in a school-based universal intervention adapted in two different (non-Western) countries, Colombia and Chile. Indeed, the school-based intervention reported in this work give special attention not only to the communalities of the two contexts (i.e. they are based on the same theoretical model and programme background), but also to the local adaptations of these interventions in Colombia and Chile (i.e. the implementation considering different cultural and historical backgrounds of countries involved). Using an RCT with a pretest–post-test design (and controlling for the initial prosocial status of participants, their gender and level of education), current results highlighted different effects of a similar programme in both sites. First, the school-based universal programme designed for promoting prosocial behaviours in the peer context obtained a positive cross-national effect on prosocial behaviour rated by three informants. In Colombia, this effect was moderated by the initial level of prosociality of the participants and SES. In detail, effects of the CEPIDEA on Colombian adolescents' prosocial behaviours were statistically significant for those adolescents who exhibited lower initial levels of prosociality at the beginning of the intervention. Hence, the adaptation of the CEPIDEA in Colombia seemed to have a positive effect on those adolescents who lack adequate social and interpersonal skills prior to the intervention. This preliminary result in terms of preventive efforts might be explained by interactions that may occur among peers who act prosocially. Prosocial peer interactions can improve cooperation and supportiveness among classmates which, in turn, may create a natural positive behavioural regulation in the group (Berger et al., 2015). Probably, a kind of reciprocal regulation occurs when adolescents react in prosocial ways to their less prosocial classmates and those who are less predisposed to help others in daily peer-interactions have an alternative chance and benefited from this kind of “peer positive contagion.” In addition, similarly, comparing those Colombian participants of the intervention coming from families with higher SES exhibited a lower change in their prosocial behaviour compared to those who did not participate in any intervention programme, while participants did not differ at low levels of education. This result is in line with prior evidence, in which children who experienced low status showed more communal and prosocial behaviour and endorsed more egalitarian life goals and values compared with those who experienced high status (Guinote, Cotzia, Sandhu, & Siwa, 2015). Yet, as these moderation effects were exploratory in nature, cautions must be taken in generalising these results. In the case of Chile, results were in line with previous findings (Caprara et al., 2014, 2015), by pointing out the universal effects of the ProCiviCo programme on fostering prosocial behaviour regardless of participants' socio-economic background.

Considering the hypothesized decrease in physical aggression, our results did not indicate a main effect of the intervention programmes in both countries. This lack of effect could be due to different reasons. First, we used only a pre-post testing and, as the literature stressed behaviours such as physical aggression must need time to be redirected (Moffitt, 1993). Also, the consideration of overt physical aggressive behaviours, instead of other more malleable kind of aggressiveness (i.e. as covert aggression), can explain the lack of effect of the programme on reducing this maladaptive outcome. Moreover, during adolescence, the development of aggressive behaviours followed a pattern of stability or growing from middle to late adolescence (Kokko et al., 2006). In addition, following Obsuth et al. (2015)'s reasoning, an aggressive adolescent will tend to be-friend with an aggressive adolescent, and will experience the peer pressure to react in a “cool” way to feel accepted and avoid ridicule. In sum, from our study it seems plausible to think that the pattern of change of physical aggression follows a different process than change of prosocial development and a longer period is needed for variations on this kind of behavioural outcomes.

However, the mediational two-wave model corroborated that, after controlling for the role of gender and SES, the improvement on prosocial behaviours in both countries (moderated in the case of Colombia) predicted significantly lower level of physical aggression. In Colombia, the role of the intervention programme on the lower levels of the use of physical aggression was higher for those students who started lower in prosociality prior the programme (i.e. at the initial level). However, caution must be considered because outcomes were assessed simultaneously, and long-term effects must be tested in order to elucidate properly the hypothesized causal link between prosocial behaviours and aggressive behaviours.

Although our small-medium effect sizes were in line with meta-analytic findings in Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) programmes (standardised effect around .20; Durlak et al., 2011), we are aware that the promotion of prosocial behaviour may not be sufficient to produce more long-term and strong changes in aggression. Hence, we suggest that counteracting aggression should be embedded within a broader SEL approach in which the promotion of prosocial behaviour is just one of the several skills that should be part of the “socioemotional toolbox” which can help adolescents navigate towards positive social interactions.

Despite a number of strengths (e.g. data from two countries, the use of a RCT design, multi-informant assessment, etc.), several limitations must be acknowledged. First, this study assessed the efficacy of the intervention using a pretest–post-test design and long-term effects should be considered in future studies (of note, follow-up data are being collected in both sites). Although we assigned randomly the schools to each condition, we still found that the intervention and control group differed on their initial levels of prosocial behaviours and physical aggression in both countries. Although many factors could be responsible for these initial differences, we believe that the fact that the randomization occurred at the school-level could have played a role in such differences at the pretest. In fact, even if comparable in their socio-economic profiles, schools hold their own cultural and micro cultural characteristics and, in particular, assign more or less relevance to the promotion of prosocial values (Battistich, Schaps, Watson, Solomon, & Lewis, 2000; Reiman, 2009). Moreover, it must be acknowledgeable that there is a temporal distance in time regarding the moment in which the programme was implemented and data were collected in both countries (2012 in Colombia and 2017 in Chile). Each cite' results depend on the adaptation of the programme to local implementations. In addition, it must be considered that timing of implementation of an intervention programme depends on plausibility of application and availability of resources. Further studies must to add robustness by adding these aspects for a better methodological approach to the study of prosociality in “real” settings.

Interventions focused on peer dynamics during adolescence must benefit from a curriculum that promotes prosocial behaviours. The most promising result of this work is related to the effect on prosocial behaviours in two different countries exhibiting different common values, historicity and cultural features. These findings mainly show the relevance of programmes aimed at promoting prosocial behaviours, especially in children coming from vulnerable conditions and with less initial predispositions to act prosocially. In particular, considering current results about the indirect (i.e. mediated) effect of prosocial behaviours on reducing aggressive physical responses in both countries, this study evidences, at least partially, the mitigating role of prosocial behaviours in the face of risk factors in contexts largely marked by social conflicts (Colombia) and inequality (Chile). Of importance, this mediated effect in Colombia was significant for those children who exhibited less prosocial initial tendencies, stressing the preventive role of interventions focused on enhancing positive outcomes.

Because Prevention Science needs to look more deeply at cultural issues, one of the main strengths of the current study is the consideration of countries different from those in which most of empirical studies have been conducted (North America and Europe). Processes of specific contextual and local adaptation of programmes facilitate the achievement of one of the main and common (global) goals of school-based preventive interventions, that is fostering prosocial behaviours as a protective factor against student aggression.